---
layout: page
title: Table Talk - May 2017
author: Australian Timetable Association
subject: Transportation
---

<div style=" font-family: TimesNewRoman, 'Times New Roman', Times, Baskerville, Georgia, serif;
            font-style: italic;
            font-weight: bold;
            font-size: 48pt;
            text-transform: uppercase;
            color: black;">TABLE TALK</div>

This issue is also available as an [ePub for book readers and tablets ![ePub](https://efb778d9cbba3f4c5d31-2a2416132ea09b6c13760470ead1b56d.ssl.cf1.rackcdn.com/epubicon.svg)](ttalk201705.epub) or a PDF  [exactly as printed 244kB ![PDF](https://efb778d9cbba3f4c5d31-2a2416132ea09b6c13760470ead1b56d.ssl.cf1.rackcdn.com/pdficon.svg)](http://cdn.timetable.org.au/tabletalk201705issue.pdf)

**AUSTRALASIAN TIMETABLE NEWS**

**No. 297, May 2017 ISSN 1038-3697, RRP \$4.95**

**Published by the Australian Timetable Association**

[**www.austta.org.au**](https://www.timetable.org.au)

# **RAIL AND TRAM NEWS**

## **Budget speculation: Victoria & Inland Rail**

According to the *Herald Sun* on 7 April, the Federal Budget, to be
presented on 9 May, is expected to include more than \$1 billion funding
from the sale of the Port of Melbourne for upgrades to:

-   the Albury line;
-   the Bairnsdale line;
-   the Warrnambool line; and
-   a railway to Melbourne Airport.

According to the ABC on 20 April the Federal Budget will include funding
of more than \$1 billion for construction of the Brisbane-Melbourne
Inland Freight Railway. This was obviously a deliberate Federal
government leak,

The Federal government on 20 April announced the first physical work on
the **Inland Rail** project. In May two bridges will be built at
Tomingley West and Narwonah between Parkes and Narromine on the ARTC
cross-country line. The \$1.3 million project will replace two timber
bridges by reinforced concrete culvert structures designed and built to
Inland Rail engineering specifications.

*Recipients of* **Table Talk Newswire** *will receive a special Budget
Eve edition with details of railway and public transport measures.*
(Table Talk Newswire *is a between-editions email newsletter, available
to members upon request to the Rail Editor, whose address is at end of
this magazine.)*

## **Non-connections**

Following is a list of current rural passenger services which do not
connect with trains to State capitals but do appear in current Public
timetables. Services marked P are basically placement runs.

**Queensland Rail Travel trains:**\

0830 Daily Cairns-Kuranda\

0930 Daily Cairns-Kuranda\

1400 Daily Kuranda-Cairns\

1530 Daily Kuranda-Cairns\

0830 Wed Normanton-Croydon (isolated line)\

0830 Thur Croydon-Normanton (isolated line)

**Savannahlander train:**\

0630 Wed Cairns-Almaden\

0800 Thur Almaden-Forsayth\

0830 Fri Forsayth-Mt Surprise\

0800 Sat Mt Surprise-Cairns

**NSW TrainLink trains:**\

0342 Mon-Fri Lithgow-Bathurst P\

0519 Sat/Sun Lithgow-Bathurst P\

2217 Sat/Sun Bathurst-Lithgow P\

2227 Mon-Thur Bathurst-Lithgow P\

2255 Fridays Bathurst-Lithgow P

**NSW TrainLink buses:**\

0835 Daily Casino-Tweed Heads (connects from 0555 XPT from Brisbane)\

0610 Fri Narrabri-Burren Junction P\

0730 Mon Narrabri-Wee Waa P\

1745 Mon Wee Waa-Narrabri P\

1825 Fri Burren Junction-Narrabri P

**V/Line buses:**\

Many buses, Traralgon-Maffra-Sale, Traralgon-Rosedale-Sale,
Bairnsdale-Lakes Entrance-Marlo, Genoa-Mallacoota,
Wangaratta-Beechworth, Wangaratta-Bright, Wangaratta-Corowa, and v.v.,
but they are not listed in full because this again raises the conundrum
of what is a V/Line bus and what is a non-V/Line bus.

## **QR Travel Timetable 1 April 2017**

QR Travel (long distance) has issued a new Public Timetable dated 1
April. It is online at
<http://www.queenslandrailtravel.com.au/Planyourtrip/timetable> The only
detected change is that the RailBus connection between Rockhampton and
Yeppoon / Emu Park no longer operates. This is believed to be due to
declining patronage.

Despite expectations that the Electric Tilt Train refurbishment program
would be complete by April, the replacement diesel-hauled, slower trains
continue on some days of the week (Brisbane-Rockhampton Mon, Thur, Sat;
Rockhampton-Brisbane Tue, Wed, Fri, Sun; Brisbane-Bundaberg Tue, Wed,
Fri, Sun; Bundaberg-Brisbane Mon, Thur, Sat).

## **QR Citytrain to the Commonwealth Games**

QR Citytrain services from Brisbane to the Gold Coast will be doubled to
eight per hour during the Commonwealth games from 4 to 15 April next
year.

However, Rail Back On Track spokesman Robert Dow says that will result
in chaos for other parts of the train network unless Queensland Rail
fast-tracks improvements. “If someone doesn’t sound the alarm now, it
will be calamitous, Trains and crews will have to be taken from other
areas to boost the Gold Coast services. They will probably need to close
some lines down altogether for the period of the Games,” he said.

## **QR Citytrain Easter services**

Over the Easter long weekend train services were reduced from the usual
half-hourly off-peak frequency to hourly on most lines. This was said to
be to ensure service reliability. There were half hourly services on the
Airport line, and additional services before and after sporting events.
Due to trackwork between Park Road and Kuraby, these trains were
replaced by buses.

## **Cyclone Debbie**

Prior to the arrival of Cyclone Debbie on 28 March **QR** and
**Aurizon** ceased operating north of Mackay and south of Cairns. On the
Mt Isa line, no trains operated east of Hughenden. Aurizon shut down
operations on the Newlands and Goonyella systems and removed all stored
rollingstock at the Townsville Port (mainly sugar sets) to yards at
Stuart and Partington. The Ports of Abbot Point, Dalrymple Bay and Hay
Point were closed from 25 March. Abbot Point was closest to the crossing
point. Significant inland flooding occurred across the Bowen Basin
mining region impacting many of Queensland's biggest mines. There was
significant damage to railway lines.

Portions of Aurizon’s Central Queensland Coal Network are expected to be
out of action for at least five weeks, after Debbie struck. Significant
landslips occurred on the Goonyella System- the most important and
busiest system - which connects to the Dalrymple Bay Coal Terminal and
Hay Point Coal Terminal. It is expected to re-open in early May. The
Newlands System, which connects to the Abbot Point Coal Terminal
re-opened on 14 April – it had minor damage at a number of sites, but no
major damage. Two weeks was also the time for return for the Moura
System, which takes coal to the Port of Gladstone. This system re-opened
on 12 April. The Blackwater System, which also links to the Port of
Gladstone, was re-opened on March 31, but further flooding in
Rockhampton again closed the line on 1 April. It re-opened from 10
April.

Aurizon has lowered its earnings forecast for FY17 by between \$100
million and \$115 million, because of extended shutdowns after Cyclone
Debbie. However, Aurizon had earlier said the cost of repairing the
infrastructure, and the loss of network revenue, is expected to be
recovered “as part of the established regulatory process with the
Queensland Competition Authority.

As the remnants of the cyclone moved south, there was massive rain in SE
Queensland and NE NSW on 30 March. In the Brisbane area, free public
transport was provided to keep people off the roads. From 31 March until
2 April **QR Citytrain** Beenleigh and Gold Coast lines were suspended
between Kingston and Ormeau due to flooding with replacement buses
operating. On 31 March **NSW TrainLink** trains and buses were suspended
north of Taree. Next day, XPT services had returned, but TrainLink’s bus
services remained disrupted.

## **Olive Downs coal mine**

Coal mining company Pembroke Resources South is proposing an open cut
coal mine at Olive Downs in Central Queensland. The project includes an
18 km railway branching from the Norwich Park line.

## **ARTC & JHR WTTs 5 May 2017**

ARTC’s Working Timetable of 5 May 2017 is now
on their website at
<http://www.artc.com.au/customers/operations/mtp/2017-05-07/>

The schedule for the winter Ghan Explorer (ultra-touristy train) is now
included from Tarcoola to Adelaide.

John Holland Rail (NSW Country Regional Network) WTT of 5 May is now on
their website at
<http://www.jhrcrn.com.au/what-we-do/network-operations-access/standard-working-timetable-swtt/>

In addition to the minor alterations in the John Holland Rail WTT noted
in the April *Table Talk*, page 4, there is now a third daily Pacific
National freight on Mondays to Fridays to Crisps Creek (arrive 1415) on
the Canberra line, conveying Sydney rubbish to fill up the Woodlawn
mine, but still only two empty return journeys. On Saturdays, there is
still only one rubbish freight.

## **JHR NSW CRN planning document**

John Holland Rail NSW Country Regional Network have placed on their
website a document entitled *Possessions List – Major*. This is much
more interesting document than the name indicates. It lists forthcoming
track possessions from 21 March 2017 until 13 May 2018. In addition, it
lists known forthcoming special trains, whether special passenger
trains, work trains, AK track inspection/measurement trains or SPENO
rail grinding trains. In regard to track possessions it lists the line
covered, the civil engineering work to be undertaken and the relevant
Country Train Notice. For example, on the Joppa Junction to Canberra
line there will be weekend closedowns for work on 13-14 May and 19-20
August 2017, 3-4 February and 12-13 May 2018. Although not relevant to
the Joppa Jnc-Canberra line, because these closedowns coincide with ARTC
closedowns on the Main South line, they also advise that certain freight
trains – 7SP5, 6BA2, 7YN2 and ADDL – will be diverted to operate via JHR
CRN’s Western line. Appended to the list are Network Availability Maps
showing the scope of works for April, May and June 2017 and a more
detailed map of the Main West Closedown on 22-23 April 2017.

The list also extends to advice of the dates of forthcoming editions of
Working Timetables – 6 May (as already reported in *Table Talk*) and 23
September 2017. No doubt this will also be the date of new Transport for
NSW and ARTC Working Timetables.

The list can be accessed at
<http://www.jhrcrn.com.au/what-we-do/network-operations-access/network-access-planning-performance/>
under the heading of Possession Programme – March Release.

## **Qube expands**

Railway freight operator Qube has acquired rail freight forwarding
company Austrans Container Service. Qube says there are no immediate
changes for the business.

## **ACCC rejects ARTC access rates**

In a draft decision issued on 20 April, the Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission said the Australian Rail Track Corporation is not
being realistic with its proposed access terms for the Hunter Valley
network. After six years operating the network under the 2011 Hunter
Valley Access Undertaking (HVAU), the ARTC is scheduled to replace that
scheme with the 2017 HVAU by 30 June. But the ACCC has rejected the
ARTC’s proposed 2017 HVAU, saying it disagrees with key figures
calculated in the document. The ACCC draft decision is open for public
comment until 12 May.

ACCC Chairman Rod Sims said it was trying to act in the best interest of
all parties involved. “In making its decision the ACCC has recognised
the need to balance the economically efficient operation of, use of, and
investment in the Hunter Valley rail network with the legitimate
business interests of ARTC and the interests of all access seekers,
including passenger trains, coal and non-coal freight,” he said.

Two key issues raised by the ACCC are with the ARTC’s calculations of
rate of return (RoR) and weighted average mine life (WAML) figures
within the terms of the access deal. Both sets of figures will be
crucial for determining the prices the ARTC can justifiably charge users
for access to the network. The ARTC is proposing a new RoR of 6.51%
(real pre-tax) and 7.86% (nominal pre-tax) – a pair of figures the ACCC
calls “not appropriate”.

Instead, the ACCC is proposing an RoR in the new deal of 4.60% (real
pre-tax) and 7.11% (nominal pre-tax). As for WAML, the ARTC is
calculating 16.5 years – but the ACCC says a WAML between 20 and 32
years would be more accurate, saying the ARTC’s figure is
“inappropriately conservative”.

## **Moorebank terminal**

Construction on the long-anticipated intermodal terminal at Moorebank,
south western Sydney, began in early April. The site has a direct rail
link to Port Botany and the interstate freight network. The Commonwealth
has committed to contribute \$370 million to the project, along with 158
ha of land. The terminal is expected to open by late 2018, and the
interstate terminal to open in 2020. Both terminals are to operate under
an open access regime.

## **Sydney Trains October timetable**

The following changes will take place from October 2017:

-   Homebush services to be extended to Parramatta.
-   Y-Link services to run between Richmond and Leppington.

## **Sydney Trains: 2019 timetable planning**

ABC News in Sydney reported on 19 April on Sydney Trains timetable
planning for 2019 following the opening of the North-West Metro line.
The document indicates that the operation of the privately run Metro
will have a complex domino effect on the Sydney system as existing
services are rerouted, or even cancelled.

The ABC claimed that direct train services from Penrith will be reduced,
but there would be new express trains to the Northern line. Penrith
currently enjoys 11 fast trains to the city during the 0700-0800 peak
period, but a 2018 concept map suggests it could lose four services with
capacity for up to 4,000 passengers. From 2018 on, Penrith's peak-hour
travellers lose direct access to the City Circle and the North Shore,
with trains instead terminating at Central.

The Northern line services will be boosted as trains are re-routed away
from the converted Epping-to-Chatswood line. Two new peak-hour services
are also accommodated in the concept timetables. During peak-hour, five
fast trains will depart Epping and service just five stops — Eastwood,
West Ryde, Rhodes, Strathfield and Central — supporting high-rise
population centres. The document suggests Central Coast trains via the
North Shore line may be re-routed down the Northern line via
Strathfield, with most services commencing from Gosford.

The re-timetabling of peak-hour trains and slower stopping patterns down
the Northern, Southern, Inner-West and Western lines is another impact
of the Sydney Metro. For instance, travellers from Liverpool can expect
to take up to 10 minutes extra to the CBD. A rail planning map
reinforces this and shows two extra Northern line trains travelling
between Strathfield and Central during the morning peak, to as many as
15 per hour in 2019.

There are also hints that Sydney's suburban trains may become more
crowded. An impact document predicts a reduction of 'West to North'
capacity by 25%, suggesting more passengers on already crowded trains
from Sydney's western suburbs.

The 2014 planning documents were secured after a successful three-year
legal battle by the ABC with Transport for NSW to release the
information.

The document may be accessed at
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/3672950-Draft-Timetables-and-Map-for-2018-Sydney-Train.html>

***Comment:*** *The report needs to be treated with considerable reserve.
Firstly, the ABC’s report was based on a document dating from 2014 which
is now likely to have been overtaken. None of the current proposed
changes are included.* *Secondly, the document appears to be basically a
fleet plan, rather than a timetable.*

## **NSW passenger train punctuality**

The NSW Auditor-General released a report into NSW passenger train punctuality on 11 April. She found that rail agencies are well placed to manage the forecast increase in passengers up to 2019, including joining the Sydney Metro Northwest to the network at Chatswood. Their plans and strategies are evidence-based, and mechanisms to assure effective implementation are sound.

However, based on forecast patronage increases, the rail agencies will
find it hard to maintain punctuality after 2019 unless the capacity of
the network to carry trains and people is increased significantly. If
recent higher than forecast patronage growth continues, the network may
struggle to maintain punctuality before 2019.

Transport for NSW has undertaken considerable work on developing
strategies to increase capacity and maintain punctuality after 2019, but
remains some way from putting a costed plan to the government. There is
a significant risk that investments will not be made soon enough to
handle future patronage levels. Ideally, planning and investment
decisions should have been made already.

Passenger rail punctuality indicators adopted in NSW are good practice,
and include measures of train punctuality and customer delay.
Measurement of punctuality is reasonably accurate, but there is some
minor room for improvement. More information could be published on
punctuality performance, particularly the Customer Delay Measure.

The report found that the rail network around North Sydney creates
punctuality problems for afternoon peak services heading to Western
Sydney and to Hornsby via Strathfield. East Hills express services
performed well below target during the afternoon peak. The punctuality
of intercity trains lags behind suburban trains, and there was an
extended period of declining punctuality between 2011 and 2014.

The Auditor-General recommended that:

1.  Transport for NSW should ensure that programs to address rail
    patronage growth over the next five to ten years are provided to the
    government for Cabinet consideration as soon as possible.

2.  Sydney Trains and Transport for NSW should
    a.  maintain effective oversight and resourcing for all strategies
        designed to address rail patronage growth
    b.  adjust strategies for any patronage growth above projection.

3.  Sydney Trains, NSW Trains and Transport for NSW should publish
    Customer Delay results by June 2018.

4.  Transport for NSW, Sydney Trains and NSW Trains should agree by
    December 2017:
    a.  specific performance requirements for intercity train, track and
        signal availability and reliability
    b.  guidelines for train priorities during disruptions and
        indicators of control centre performance in implementing these
        guidelines.

5.  Sydney Trains, NSW Trains and Transport for NSW should by June 2018:
    a.  improve the accuracy of patronage measurement and develop a
        better understanding of patronage growth trends
    b.  address small errors in the adjustment factors used for
        determining a train’s punctuality status
    c.  improve their understanding of the factors impacting on        intercity punctuality.

6.  Transport for NSW should, commencing June 2017, explore the
    potential to use behavioural insights to encourage more passengers
    to travel outside the height of the morning peak (8 am to 9 am).

The report can be accessed at
<http://www.audit.nsw.gov.au/publications/latest-reports/rail-punctuality>

## **NSW TrainLink: Newcastle line**

The *Newcastle Herald* analysed the Auditor-General’s report on 12
April. According to the report the punctuality of intercity trains has
continued to lag well behind Sydney’s suburban trains since 2011,
peaking at an almost 11% difference in the middle of 2015 and hovering
at about a 5% difference in July 2016.

And, unlike other services that improve during inter-peak periods
throughout the day, intercity trains like the Newcastle to Sydney line
actually get worse. For example, services from Hamilton to Central
averaged 90.9% AM peak punctuality on weekdays in the period between
July 2015 and March 2016, below the 92% peak punctuality benchmark. But
the service actually got worse as the day wore on – falling to 87.5% in
the inter-peak period, and down to 85.1% in the PM peak.

The report found that rail agencies “were not able to provide
evidence-based explanations” for why the service is so slow, but that it
probably has to do with a lack of investment. []{#pd_a_9721364
.anchor}“A key factor in the relatively poor performance of NSW Trains’
intercity service may be the old age of its trains and of the tracks and
signals outside the metropolitan area,” the report found. “Transport for
NSW acknowledged that recent investment in the NSW Trains intercity
fleet and track and signal infrastructure had been relatively lower than
investment in suburban trains and the suburban network. Transport for
NSW also advised that the recently announced Intercity Fleet will
address some of this relative under-investment.”

The issues with punctuality are impacting on customers, too. The latest
customer delay figures from April 2016 for the morning peak to Central
show the Newcastle and Central Coast line was the worst performer on the
network, at a four minutes and 22 seconds delay average.

At least part of the problem, according to NSW Trains, is a lack of
control over the network. Between July 2015 and March 2016 the agency
said 72% of train lateness was down to “other agencies and
infrastructure and fleet failures”.

In a statement, a spokesman for NSW TrainLink said that the last few
months had seen punctuality on services to Newcastle “affected by
extreme weather”, including hot conditions that caused “speed
restrictions to be placed on trains and the impact of storms on the rail
network”. The spokesman said intercity trains are also “more exposed to
impacts of breakdown of freight trains during the off peak during the
day which can disrupt the afternoon peak. There are a range of impacts
on punctuality, some of which are beyond our control. He said the
overnight period provided an opportunity to “reset” the system which
“typically enables better punctuality in the morning peak. The afternoon
peak is more likely to be impacted by flow-on effects of delays on the
rail network during the day.”

## **Newcastle Tram**

NSW Transport Minister Andrew Constance announced on 18 April that the
new 2.7 km light rail line in Newcastle will operate without catenary
for much of its length to reduce the line’s visual impact. The fleet of
six CAF Urbos trams will be equipped with an onboard energy storage
system. The line is due to open in 2019.

*See Letter to the Editor below*

## **Sydney Trains & NSW TrainLink: Easter Show**

The following additional and altered services operated for the Sydney Royal Easter Show (6 to 19 April):

**Weekdays** Sydney Trains

-   Express services between Central and Olympic Park every 20 minutes
    from 0730 to 1030, then every 30 minutes until 2300, stopping at
    Redfern and Strathfield.
-   Lidcombe to Olympic Park every 10 minutes from 0530 until midnight.

NSW TrainLink Blue Mountains Line**:** Up trains made extra stops at
Lidcombe between 0925 and 1500 and down trains between 1900 and 0100.

**Easter Long Weekend (14-17 April)** Sydney Trains

-   Express services between Central and Olympic Park every 8 minutes
    from 0900 until midnight, stopping at Redfern and Strathfield.
-   Lidcombe shuttle services to Olympic Park every 10 minutes from 0530
    to 0900, then extended to run Blacktown to Olympic Park every 10
    minutes between 0900 and 2200 and between Olympic Park and Penrith /
    Schofields every 30 minutes between 0900 and midnight.

NSW TrainLink Blue Mountains Line:

-   An additional service to Katoomba from Central at 1847.
-   The 1718 to Mount Victoria extended to Lithgow.
-   Trains between 0800 and 2230 made additional stops at Lidcombe.

Central Coast & Newcastle Line:

-   An additional train from Hamilton at 0656, stopping at Broadmeadow,
    Cardiff, Fassifern, Morisset, Wyong, Tuggerah, Gosford, Woy Woy,
    Hornsby then Olympic Park.
-   An additional train from Hamilton at 0759, stopping all stations to
    Tuggerah, Gosford, Woy Woy, Hornsby and Olympic Park.
-   An additional train from Wyong at 0845, stopping all stations to
    Berowra, Hornsby and Olympic Park.
-   Trains to Gosford departing Central at 1845 and 1945 were extended
    to Wyong.

Southern Highlands Line: an additional train from Campbelltown at
2355, stopping all stations to Moss Vale.

There was no trackwork scheduled over the Easter long weekend.

## **Victorian Fares Manuals**

New editions of the Victorian Fares and Ticketing Manual (including maps
of public transport networks) and the Victorian Regional Bus Fares
Manual dated 1 January 2017 are available. See
<https://www.ptv.vic.gov.au/tickets/general-information/victorian-fares-and-ticketing-manual/>

## **ARTC & V/Line: NE line**

Federal Transport and Infrastructure Minister Darren Chester has
indicated that the Victorian government will need to commit to share the
cost of upgrades to the north-east line, if the Commonwealth is to help
fund the work in the upcoming budget. Chester visited the region and
rode the rails in early April.

*See also the article below on Victorian infrastructure.*

Due to a V/Line possession of the North Melbourne Flyover on the weekend
of 13 and 14 May NSW TrainLink will substitute a bus service between
Southern Cross station and Albury. V/Line will terminate services at
Broadmeadows and provide a bus service from Broadmeadows to Southern
Cross.

## **V/Line: Echuca line**

Following a boom barrier malfunction in mid-March, trains were replaced
by buses. On 30 March, the Minister for Transport, Jacinta Allen,
announced an upgrade of all 12 level crossings between Bendigo and
Echuca. The buses continued while this took place, resulting in five
weeks of bustitiuton.

From 10 April the 0115 container freight from Westgate Port Siding to
Deniliquin Rice Growers Siding via Bendigo is replaced by a train
departing at 0001 and running via Seymour (0227-0232) and Toolamba
(0332-0337), arriving Deniliquin at 0717.

## **V/Line: Geelong line**

Jeroen Weimar, the CEO of Public Transport Victoria, said on 3 April in
an interview with the *Geelong Advertiser* that a train shortage and
insufficient track access in and out of Melbourne is choking the Geelong
line. He said the shortages meant express trains weren’t a possibility
for the line — regional Victoria’s busiest commuter corridor. “I’ve got
significant pressure on how many trains I’ve got, how much track access
I’ve got and how many passengers I’ve got. Running an express train from
Geelong to Southern Cross will sacrifice too many paths that I frankly
can’t afford.”

V/Line data for February shows 7 of 12 services leaving Geelong and
arriving at Southern Cross before 0900 on a weekday are running at more
than 95% capacity. It also shows the Geelong line has failed to meet its
punctuality target of 92% in 28 of the past 31 months.

In July and September about ten more services are to be added to the
line. “We haven’t yet nailed down exactly how many additional services
we are putting in but there will be a significant number,” Mr Weimar
said. This comes after 18 services were added in January.

Mr Weimar said commuter pain could not be eased with longer trains as
many of the Geelong line platforms could not accommodate trains longer
than six carriages. Moving Tarneit and Wyndham Vale stations on to
Melbourne’s Metro network is too steep a task. “To take the metropolitan
line all the way down to Wyndham Vale and Tarneit would be a significant
expansion of the electrified network,” Mr Weimar said. He said extending
the Geelong line to Torquay or duplicating the Geelong line between
South Geelong and Waurn Ponds were not currently part of PTV plans.

## **V/Line: Western line**

A report into *Grampians and Barwon South West Region Passenger
Services* was commissioned by western Victoria councils and carried out
by John Hearsch Consulting. The very comprehensive result, dated March
2017, can be accessed at
<http://www.sthgrampians.vic.gov.au/Page/Download.aspx?c=7636>

The report identified significant unmet needs for better public
transport in the region. The Study found that residents, businesses,
government agencies and local governments in the region were not being
provided with fast public transport access to Ballarat and Melbourne. It
found that regional residents, including young people, the aged, those
in need of medical specialities and those in need of access to choices
in work and education, often had inadequate public transport access to
regional centres like Horsham, Ararat or Hamilton, let alone Ballarat,
Geelong or Melbourne. It found that the public passenger services that
are being provided beyond Ararat are sub-standard, having been little
improved from 30 years ago, and offering limited access to regional
centres and inadequate connectivity.

In response to these deficiencies, the Study Team looked at rail and
coach services in the region from the passengers’ point of view. It then
developed and costed staged proposals for public transport improvement
in the region.

The proposals made in the Report range from improvements capable of
immediate implementation to those requiring substantial investment,
particularly needed as Victoria’s western rail network moves toward
gauge standardisation.

The most immediate **Stage 1** recommendation is to increase the Ararat
to Melbourne train service from 3 to 4 daily return services, including
a new early morning train to Melbourne and a return afternoon train from
Melbourne. This will greatly assist business travellers. By 2019,
Ballarat line upgrades will allow a further improvement to 5 daily
return trains between Melbourne and Ararat.

The central conclusions of the Study are that rail passenger services
can and should be reinstated to Horsham and Hamilton, and that the
railway between Ballarat and Ararat should be converted from broad to
standard gauge, in **Stage 2** of the recommended process, between 2021
and 2026. By 2026, or sooner if possible, there should be four daily
trains, with comfort and performance at least comparable with the
popular VLocity trains, in each direction from Horsham, three from
Hamilton and six from Ararat, with passengers changing at Ballarat for
rapid and frequent Melbourne services. There are currently 22 daily
trains to choose from at Ballarat and more are likely to be added after
the \$518 million Ballarat line upgrades approved in the 2016 state
budget are completed.

After the currently funded Ballarat line improvements are completed,
Ararat train service should be increased to five weekday services,
accelerated by Ararat trains omitting stops served by other trains, i.e.
Ardeer, Deer Park, Caroline Springs, Rockbank and Melton, and increases
to four return services on weekends

Upgrading of these services is considerably more complex than elsewhere
in Victoria due to differences in rail gauge, fragmented control of rail
corridors, the need to procure suitable standard gauge passenger rolling
stock and related maintenance facilities, and the need to upgrade many
level crossings, signalling, safe working and stations in the regions.

Safety upgrades are recommended including signalling improvements such
as automated train protection warning systems and the upgrading to
active protection (booms and barriers) of 77 level crossings between
Ararat, Horsham and Hamilton.

The Study recommends that, ultimately, the Ballarat line should be
quadruplicated as far as Caroline Springs and thence duplicated to
Ballarat (plus a standard gauge line alongside from Warrenheip to
Ballarat).

The Study also looked at coach connections servicing the region and
identified important improvements in coach services, including
additional services between Hamilton and Ballarat and new weekend
services to Casterton and Mount Gambier. Coach service improvements are
also proposed for a number of towns to provide better regional
connectivity, including Balmoral, Cavendish, Coleraine, Dunkeld and Lake
Bolac.

Other improvements are recommended to better overcome isolation in
smaller communities and to provide tourist-friendly coach schedules that
would enable more public transport-based holidaymakers to visit the
region’s many attractions, including the northern and southern
Grampians, the Pyrenees, the Wartook Valley, Little Desert, West Wimmera
and Glenelg shire attractions. Such access is currently very limited;
better access will help accommodation and hospitality industries in
these areas.

The Report also highlights the need to upgrade facilities for disabled
and elderly travellers, as most coach stops and stations in the region
don’t currently comply with the *Disability Discrimination Act*. As well
as upgrading these to compliance, the Report also recommends improved
disabled toilet facilities, such as “Changing Places” adult disabled
facilities at several stations and staff to assist passengers with
luggage at major interchanges. All stations in the regions - including
Stawell, Murtoa, Horsham, Glenthompson, Willaura, Dunkeld and Hamilton -
will need to be restored and upgraded as part of the process, improving
local infrastructure and providing local employment.

Longer term possibilities for Hamilton and Horsham trains to also travel
to Geelong or via Geelong to Melbourne are also outlined and costed for
consideration.

The cost of proposals in the Report has been estimated in a
peer-reviewed process. Stage 1 of the proposals (those for early
implementation) - are costed at \$1.6m; Stage 2, including new trains
and standardisation of the Ballarat to Ararat railway and associated
train stabling, maintenance and signalling, has an estimated capital
cost of \$369m and an additional annual operating cost of \$6.1 million.
Although the required investment is substantial, all major transport
investments involve large spending to provide the access and
connectivity communities need. The investments are spread over several
years and will be reflected in employment opportunities as well as wider
economic social benefits.

## **V/Line: Maryborough line**

To accommodate visitors to the annual Clunes Booktown Festival, V/Line
is again operating a service of special VLocity DMUs on Saturday 6 and
Sunday 7 May. Special trains depart Ballarat at 0955, 1210 and 1530,
returning from Maryborough at 1100, 1335 and 1705.

## **Yarra Trams timetable 1 May**

New Route 58 from West Coburg to Toorak merges routes 8 and 55 to improve services to meet high demand in the city's inner west and north-west. Route 58 delivers low-floor trams to the Parkville hospital precinct and Melbourne Zoo for the first time.

Route 6 will be extended to operate through from Moreland to Glen Iris: The new route 58 has enabled Route 6 to be extended from Moreland to Glen Iris via Melbourne University. Train connections include Prahran and Armadale stations.

Journey times have been updated to reflect increasing congestion on Melbourne's roads (75% of the network is on shared roads).

There will be some reduction to services on routes 96, 86, 19, 59,11 and
67, mainly to night services:

-   Route 96 from East Brunswick: Removing three weekday city-bound peak
    hour services between 0800 and 0900.
-   Route 19 to Coburg North: Four Friday night services removed,
    reducing frequency between 2000 and 2100 from every ten 10 minutes
    to a 20-minute frequency. Two Sunday night services have also been
    cut.
-   Route 86 to Bundoora: Friday night services between 2130 and 2300
    reduced from every 15 minutes to 20 minutes.
-   Route 67 to Carnegie: The last tram on Sunday night removed.
-   Route 59 to Airport West: One Sunday night service removed.

Public Transport Minister Jacinta Allan said, "Like all timetable
changes, we will monitor how passengers are using the new services and
make further adjustments if necessary." Last year tramway patronage
increased 12 % to 203.8 million journeys.

## **Yarra Trams to the Grand Prix**

On 25 and 26 March, the weekend of the Grand Prix in Melbourne, Yarra
Trams operated an intensive service to the gates either side of Albert
Park:

-   From Spencer and Collins Streets along the St Kilda light rail line
    (gates 1 and 2);
-   From Spencer and Collins Streets to Albert Road, South Melbourne
    (gate 3);
-   From Swanston and La Trobe Streets along St Kilda Road to the
    Esplanade, St Kilda (gates 5, 8, 9 and 10);
-   From Swanston and La Trobe Streets along St Kilda Road to Dandenong
    Road, Windsor (gates 5, 8 and 9).

The down side was that all tram lines branching from St Kilda Road were
reduced to shuttle services from their respective junctions, and there
were no trams beyond Wright St on the St Kilda light rail line (but
there were replacement buses).

## Melbourne Airport railway
**from the Age 30 March**

Runaway population growth in Melbourne's north-west has put plans for a
rail line to Melbourne Airport in jeopardy, just as calls by the airport
for a rail connection grow more urgent. The Andrews government has been
warned it will need to invest billions on a new rail link between the
airport and the city in future years, or hope the Tullamarine Freeway
can continue to carry the load, despite warnings from the airport that
it faces gridlock within a decade if a rail line is not built. Melbourne
Airport believes a rail link is needed within 10 to 15 years.

The government's \$10.9 billion Melbourne Metro tunnel was designed to
create capacity for Melbourne's rail system to support a link to
Tullamarine, with airport trains proposed to run via the planned Metro
tunnel some time after it opens in 2026. But the tunnel must also handle
booming demand on the Sunbury and Melton lines, both of which serve
rapidly growing populations. Melton line passenger numbers are expected
to quadruple within 15 years, overtaking the busy Frankston line, the
Melbourne Metro Rail Authority says, and numbers on the Sunbury line
have grown at a runaway rate of 12% a year. Both those lines will feed
into the Melbourne Metro tunnel. This soaring demand has forced state
rail planners to rewrite long-term service plans for the tunnel, and an
airport line has effectively been jettisoned.

As recently as 2013, Public Transport Victoria published plans for the
Metro tunnel that included an airport link with six trains an hour. But
the most recent service plan for Melbourne Metro, published in the 2016
business case, makes no mention of a rail line to Melbourne Airport.
Rather, it predicts the tunnel will be used by up to 14 trains an hour
to and from Sunbury and nine trains to and from Melton. It will handle
23 trains an hour, which would leave no capacity for an airport line.

The government now faces calls to build an entirely new tunnel for
airport trains. The proposal, by the Rail Futures Institute, involves
building a new line between Southern Cross station and Sunshine, mostly
underground. The new line would also have new dedicated trains with
luggage storage.

Put to the Public Transport Minister Jacinta Allan in recent weeks, the
airport link would be a major investment for the Andrews government,
which has never committed to building a rail line to Melbourne Airport.
This is despite predictions from the airport that the Tullamarine
Freeway will soon struggle to handle peak-hour traffic, despite the
current \$1.8 billion widening project. Melbourne Airport predicts it
will have 64 million visitors a year by the early 2030s and says the
freeway will fail to cope with peak demand by then. A spokesman for
Melbourne Airport said it supported building an airport rail link.

*See also the first news article above.*

## **Adelaide Metro: Closedowns**

The plan of scheduled closures of the Adelaide suburban rail network for
civil engineering works during 2017 is posted online – see
<http://www.infrastructure.sa.gov.au/RR/rail_revitalisation/rail_maintenance_calendar>

## **TransPerth: Aubin Grove station**

On Sunday 23 April 2017, Aubin Grove station, at 23.7 km between
Cockburn Central and Kwinana on the Mandurah line, opened. The first
service departed at 1056 to Perth. A new timetable has been issued for
the Mandurah line. Details of changes to bus services in the area are
detailed below in the Bus News section.

## **Perth Metronet**

The new WA Labor government has started planning for its Perth Metronet
plan. Transport Minister Rita Saffioti says business cases are being
prepared for the extensions of the Joondalup line to Yanchep and the
Thornlie line to Cockburn. She said they would be submitted to the
Federal government, to be considered for Commonwealth funding from the
\$1.2 billion promised to WA for the now defunct Roe Highway 8 and 9.
However, Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull has said several times that the
funding will not be repurposed for any other project.

During the election campaign, Labor promised to build the \$474 million
Thornlie extension and the \$386 million Joondalup extension by 2021.
While the previous Coalition government had done some work on both rail
projects, Ms Saffioti said the plans were being reworked to incorporate
improved land use. “It’s not just a matter of working out where the
stations will be,” she said. “We want to make sure we use public
transport investment as a vehicle for positive planning and transport
outcomes. Metronet is as much a land-use plan as a transport plan. Too
many times we have planned public transport and then tried to retrofit
planning outcomes, usually at a greater expense. We need to get the
planning right from the start. Focusing on creating a vibrant,
well-connected centre that people want to live in, our train stations
need to be part of the community — close to where people live, as well
as somewhere people feel safe. They should be more than just places
where we tag on and tag off. We want to make sure we use public
transport investment as a vehicle for positive planning and transport
outcomes.” Ms Saffioti said that improving land-use outcomes would not
be restricted to new train stations. She would also look at improved
infrastructure along Perth’s heritage rail lines — Fremantle, Midland
and Armadale — with a view to increasing housing density where possible.

Ms Saffioti said preparations were also under way on the design stage of
the Ellenbrook railway.

## **TransPerth: Airport line**

A website gives detailed information about the Forrestfield-Airport line
under construction – see <http://www.forrestfieldairportlink.wa.gov.au/>

## **Australian Rail Timetables on the web**

Further to the article “What Timetables Are Published” in April *Table
Talk* (page 1) a pdf timetable of Sydney Central to Dulwich Hill light
rail service is available at
<https://www.transportnsw.info/timetables#/> Enter L1 into the search
box and a pdf timetable will be displayed for downloading or printing.

The final paragraph of the article about timetable compilations got
slightly mangled. This paragraph should have read:

**Privately produced** compilations of passenger train times are:

*Australian Rail Maps* (timetables for main routes only)
[http://www.railmaps.com.au/\#](http://www.railmaps.com.au/)

*Train Times: Passenger Trains of Australia and New Zealand* (including
working times where available)
[www.traintimes.net.au](http://www.traintimes.net.au)

## **Swiss timetabling**

From 2018 freight and passenger trains will have equal access to the
allocation of paths on Swiss railways. Freight operators are expecting
more daytime paths to be made available. These are likely to receive
fixed slots at regular intervals, reflecting the structure of the
regular-interval passenger services. This change follows legislation
that abolished the priority formerly given to passenger services, as a
reflection of voters’ wishes to have more freight carried by rail.

**Thanks** to Tony Bailey, Paul Brown, Scott Ferris, Geoff Hassall,
Albert Isaacs, Victor Isaacs, Geoff Lambert, Len Regan, Jim Wells, David
Whiteford, [www.railexpress.com.au](http://www.railexpress.com.au)*,
[www.railpage.com.au](http://www.railpage.com.au), Railway Gazette
International, Transit Australia, Age, Australian, Courier-Mail, Geelong
Advertiser, Herald Sun* and *Newcastle Herald* for Rail news.

# **LETTER TO THE EDITOR**

***Geoff Hassall*** **writes about** ***Newcastle Light Rail:***

At first it sounds utterly bizarre. A large proportion of local
residents wanted the railway to stay: Nope. OK, so let’s have light rail
on the corridor: Nope. OK, let’s at least have it run to useful suburban
destinations- hospital, university, stadium, shopping centres: Nope.
Well, let’s have it connect with the main railway line and a car park at
Islington, to remove some of the traffic from city streets: Nope. But
guess what? We are getting it without wires, something that no-one was
worried about. Why? Because the line will be so short and useless that
it is a good place to risk using new technology. Then, if it doesn’t
work, that’s OK. After all, it’s only Newcastle.

# **ODD SPOT**

From 1 April passengers (“guests” as GSR calls them) have not been
allowed to board Great Southern Rail trains without the presentation of
current visual ID – passport or Australian driver’s licence.

Users of the current 2017 hard copy version of the Bulgarian Railways,
BDZ, timetable may be surprised, because the book commences and ends
with pictures of a steam locomotive. This seems to be advertising
special excursion trains. However, knowledge of Bulgarian and the
Cyrillic alphabet is too limited to say for sure. However, this is not a
problem with using the book to plan international train journeys. This
section is presented in the familiar Latin alphabet.

# **BUS NEWS**

## **Australian Capital Territory**

**ACTION** services through the Gungahlin Town Centre were diverted from
the main thoroughfare, Hibberson St, from Monday 10 April. This is to
allow for work on the new light rail line from Gungahlin to the City.
Buses which formerly used Hibberson St now use The Valley Avenue.

Despite the introduction of a full-time ACTION service to Canberra
Airport from 20 March (see April *Table Talk*, page 11), **Royale
Coaches** also continues its service. It operates at 50 minute intervals
on weekdays, 45 minute intervals on weekends (with a lunch break every
day). It claims to offer a premium service.

## **New South Wales**

**Sydney Buses** routes 891, 348, 370, 400, 410, 418, 891 and M50 have
been diverted near the University NSW as tram construction progresses
along Anzac Parade.

With construction of the [CBD and South East Light
Rail](http://mysydneycbd.nsw.gov.au/projects/cbd-and-south-east-light-rail)
proceeding, CBD Coordinator-General Marg Prendergast on 22 March
announced plans to relocate the Central Station Coach Terminal to allow
work to begin along Eddy Avenue from 28 April. Buses currently operating
from Eddy Avenue will relocate to the Western Forecourt in late-April.
Buses operating from Pitt St will not be affected.

## **Victoria**

### **LaTrobe Valley upgrades**

The Victorian government and LaTrobe Valley Bus Lines are introducing
upgrades to bus services on 9 April. The main trunk service, route 1,
linking Moe, Morwell and Traralgon will no longer travel via Newborough,
speeding trips up by 12 minutes, with end-to-end trips now taking 38
minutes. The deleted section in Newborough will be covered by a new
local route, route 15, running hourly to/from Moe seven days a week,
compared to the half-hourly Route 1 it replaces, with time-span reduced
at either end of the day, although later Friday evening trips continue,
unlike other Moe town routes. Newborough continues to be served by the
two-hourly route 5 to Traralgon via Yallourn North and the hourly route
14 to/from Moe.

Route 13 to Moe North has been expanded to operate west of Moe
Racecourse, serving Mitchell Grove Estate and Querencia Retirement
Village, but the timetable remains two-hourly.

The bus interchange in Moe will be relocated from Market St to nearby
Albert St. Churchill residents gain from later weekend trips on route 2
from Morwell, at 1840 and 1930. Furthermore, the timetable has also been
adjusted to better link with route 30, reducing travel times to/from
Morwell - most route 2 trips through-route with route 30, the Churchill
Town Loop. Route 30 runs later, with a new 1908 trip on weekends,
additional 1913 and 2013 trips on weeknights and 2118 and 2213 trips on
Fridays.

Route 45 to Traralgon North now travels via the new homemaker centre on
Argyle St.

Weekday time-span has also been improved by three hours for town routes
in Traralgon, with earlier and later services for those commuting
outside the town and catering for a greater range of jobs and
activities. Routes 40 (Cross’s Road) and 45 (Traralgon North) now
operate 0600 – 2000, instead of 0800 – 1800, while routes 41 (Traralgon
West), 42 (Southside), 43 (Traralgon East) and 44 (Ellavale) now
commence two hours earlier at 0530 and finish an hour later at 1930.

Further changes in the Gippsland towns of Warragul and Drouin are due to
be introduced on 14 May.

### **Moonee Valley update**

Moonee Valley Coaches introduced new timetables for routes 503 (Essendon
– East Brunswick) and 506 (Moonee Ponds – Westgarth) on 26 March,
although, as neither route runs on Sundays, they actually began the
following day. Runtimes on Saturdays have been adjusted to reflect
current traffic conditions, with trips taking up to six minutes longer.
The 25 minute Saturday morning frequency on 503 now drops to half-hourly
at 1100 due to the extended runtimes, but this pattern now continues
until 1500, when the service drops to 40 minutes, with trips skipping
Windy Hill until last bus at 1835. Previously there were three
consecutive 50 to 60 minute gaps early afternoon. Meanwhile, Saturday
afternoon headways on route 506 have increased from 25 to 30 minutes due
to the longer time allowed for round trips, which now include four
minute layovers at either end (previously there was none after 1500).
The 20 minute Saturday morning headway has been maintained. In addition
to the revised Saturday timetables, the East Brunswick terminus for
route 503 has shifted from the traditional location on Blyth St to the
first stop on Nicholson St. The new location better serves the relocated
and upgraded tram terminus for route 96 (north of Blyth St) opened in
July 2015. Buses continue to operate the turning loop via Stewart St and
Robert St.

### **Avalon Airshow 2017 shuttles**

The bi-annual Avalon Airshow was held from 28 February to 5 March, with
the last three days open to the public. CDC Victoria won the contract to
run the shuttle buses from Lara station to Avalon Airport, with all
depots (including Ballarat) providing around seventy buses, including
higher capacity 14.5m and articulated vehicles. V/Line offered
through-tickets, while those travelling on myki had to buy a separate
shuttle ticket.

### **West Footscray Festival of Colours**

Due to the West Footscray Festival of Colours on Sunday 26 March, buses
on route 220 were diverted from Barkly St to Essex St until 2220,
missing stops over a 2km stretch. PTV advice implied buses would run
express along the detour but drivers were advised to pick up passengers
waiting at the route 216 and 219 stops along parallel Essex St.

### **Route 605 Metro Tunnel changes**

The Victorian State government and PTV have announced route changes to
CDC Melbourne Route 605 between the City and Gardenvale from 25 June in
conjunction with the works for the Metro Tunnel. Works to construct the
new Domain station will see the western end of Domain Road closed to
traffic for several years. As a result, trams on the newly formed Route
58 (West Coburg – Toorak) will soon be diverted to travel along new
tracks due to be laid during June and July along Toorak Road West. This
will result in the removal of trams along Domain Road, which will affect
local businesses and residents along with hundreds of students attending
Melbourne Girls Grammar. To compensate, Route 605 will be diverted to
serve the eastern end of Domain Road, no longer travelling via the
Melbourne Park sports precinct or its current clockwise City Loop along
Flinders St, Queen St, Lonsdale St and Exhibition St, a change made
relatively recently in November 1999 when the famous Batman Avenue was
closed to make way for Federation Square.

Buses will now continue along Alexandra Avenue to Anderson St, before
heading along Domain Road, Birdwood Avenue (beside the Royal Botanic
Gardens), Southbank Boulevard, Queens Bridge, Queen St, La Trobe St and
William St to terminate adjacent to Flagstaff station, before heading
along Lonsdale St, Queen St and the reverse back to Alexandra Avenue.
Passengers wishing to access other parts of the CBD will need to
transfer various east-west trams or alternatively (but more unlikely)
City Loop trains at Flagstaff

A new timetable has yet to be released however it is unclear if there
will be any upgrades to the span or weekend frequency (which currently
includes 80 minute headways on Saturday afternoons and Sundays).

### **Route 695 & 695F timetable reprint**

PTV have issued another reprint of the 22 April 2012 print-on-demand
timetable for Routes 695 (Belgrave – Gembrook) and 695F (Gembrook –
Fountain Gate). Two previous versions (one with U.S. Bus Lines branding
and one with Ventura branding) had incorrectly shown the Friday
timetable for 695F towards Fountain Gate twice (on the bottom of page 3
and top of page 4) but did not show the Friday 695F times towards
Gembrook. This has now been rectified, thanks to a report from your bus
news correspondent.

### **Online school bus information**

Local Melbourne operators Tullamarine Bus Lines (north-west suburbs) and
Cranbourne Transit (outer south-eastern suburbs) have placed timetables
and maps for their various myki school runs in recent months on their
websites, joining larger operators such as Ventura, Transdev and Donric
Group (including Sunbury Bus Service).

Unlike agencies interstate, PTV still fails to carry school bus
information online, advising parents to instead contact their child’s
school or with local operators. This is a clumsy system, with schools
sometimes providing parents with outdated information or operators
unaware of services provided by a neighbouring operator. Operators can
also be slow to recognise name changes to schools and even forget some
runs have designated mid-route pick-ups or drop-offs.

Meanwhile, Ventura relaunched their website in mid-April with a
refreshed layout.

### **Cranbourne cancellations**

With the return of school for term 2, Cranbourne Transit twice found
themselves completely short of drivers for afternoon and evening shifts.
On Tuesday 18 April, eight trips were cancelled across Routes 798, 891
and 893, including the 2134 Fountain Gate – Lynbrook on 891, the last
southbound trip.

On Thursday 20 April, a further eight trips were cancelled over Routes
795, 891, 895 and 898, including the last northbound trip on 891,
departing Lynbrook at 2130.

### **White Night in Ballarat**

Just a fortnight after the hugely popular annual arts and cultural
festival White Night in the Melbourne CBD (attracting 600,000 people),
Ballarat hosted Victoria’s first regional White Night overnight on 4
March into 5 March, attracting up to 50,000 spectators. V/Line ran
hourly coaches all night every hour to/from Melbourne, Maryborough and
Ararat. CDC Ballarat ran a special network of buses overnight. This is
unusual, as there are generally no services after 1900 on Saturdays, and
even on New Year’s Eve there is no additional service provided. Each
route was given a special “WN” designator as follows:

-   WN1 ran to Alfredton
-   WN2 did an anti-clockwise loop through North Ballarat and Wendouree,
-   WN3 ran an anti-clockwise loop via Canadian, Eureka, Brown Hill and
    Black Hill
-   WN4 operated to Federation Uni
-   WN5 ran a large clockwise loop via Golden Point, Mount Pleasant,
    Sebastopol & Redan.

Services to Wendouree (WN2) and Sebastopol (WN5) ran half-hourly from
2000 to 0000 while the other routes departed hourly. After midnight, all
five routes departed once an hour, with last departures between 0710 and
0735. Park & Ride express bus services also ran from Federation Uni and
Stockland Shopping Centre in Wendouree every half hour, departing from a
special bus hub in Armstrong St.

### **Ballarat Begonia Festival shuttles**

March also saw Ballarat play host to the annual Begonia Festival at the
Botanical Gardens on March 11 to 13. CDC Ballarat provided shuttle buses
from Ballarat station meeting each train arrival and departure from 1000
to 1700 each day, while a Park & Ride shuttle operated out of Victoria
Park from 0930 to 1730.

### **O’Connell’s (Omeo) sells**

Local Omeo operator O’Connell’s sold to the Dyson Group effective 1
April. The O’Connell family have operated buses since 1958 as D.M. (Max)
and D.J. (Dot) O’Connell. The business was managed by their son Rod from
1976. He later purchased the business and registered it as a company on
21 November 1995.

Other than local school runs in the Dinner Plains area, since May 2007
O’Connnells have operated the Omeo – Mount Hotham –Bright. ‘Alps Link’
PTV intertown route, initially started as a one year trial, operating a
return trip each Monday and Friday. By 2010 it was thrice weekly,
Monday/Wednesday/Friday in summer and Wednesday/Friday/Sunday during the
snow season. It is currently operating on a five-year contract until
mid-2018.

### **Easter Timetables**

Easter saw yet another example of inconsistent (and therefore confusing)
public holiday timetables operating in Victoria depending on route or
location.

Contact was made with various town bus operators, with buses in Ararat,
Bacchus Marsh, Ballarat, Bellarine Peninsula, Colac, Echuca, Geelong,
Horsham, LaTrobe Valley, Maryborough, Mildura, Mt Egerton, Portland,
Strathfieldsaye, Warrnambool and Wodgona all confirming that their usual
Saturday timetables would apply on Easter Saturday.

Seymour Coaches (Seymour), Fallons (Shepparton & Wangaratta) & Swan Hill
Bus Lines (Swan Hill) each advised, however, that their services would
not be running, despite the PTV website and journey planner showing
otherwise. Castlemaine Bus Lines (Castlemaine) and Trotters (Hamilton)
failed to reply.

Furthermore, Tullamarine Bus Lines did not operate their
demand-responsive Route 490 between Airport West Shoppingtown and
Gowanbrae on Easter Saturday, but all other Melbourne operators provided
service on their 6-day-a-week services.

On Easter Sunday most operators across Victoria adhered to their usual
Sunday timetables, although Warrnambool Bus Lines advised that their
various town buses would not be operating. The PTV website was initially
showing an “Easter Sunday” timetable for the routes, but this was
corrected mid-afternoon on Maundy Thursday thanks to a report made to
PTV.

### **Western Australia**

**TransPerth** changes effective 23 April 2017 in conjunction with the
opening of the Aubin Grove station are:

-   525 Cockburn Central-Hammond Park West via Baningan Avenue is split
    into 525 Cockburn Central-Aubin Grove via Baningan Avenue (weekday
    frequency increased from 60 minutes to 30 minutes) and 535 Aubin
    Grove-Hammond Park West.
-   526 Cockburn Central-Hammond Park East via Wentworth Parade is split
    into 526 Cockburn Central-Aubin Grove via Wentworth Parade (weekday
    frequency increased from 60 minutes to 30 minutes) and 536 Aubin
    Grove-Hammond Park East.
-   527 Cockburn Central-Wandi via Atwell is split into 527 Cockburn
    Central-Aubin Grove via Atwell and 537 Aubin Grove-Wandi.
-   534 Aubin Grove-Wattleup is a new school days service with one am
    trip to Aubin Grove and one pm trip from Aubin Grove.

Other changes are:

-   19 Perth-Yokine, weekday late evening services discontinued.
-   34 Perth-Cannington: additional early morning Curtin Uni-Perth
    services.
-   67 Perth-Mirrabooka: weekday late evening services discontinued.
-   101 Canning Bridge-Curtin Uni: weekday service increased from 60
    minutes to 30 minutes.
-   115 Perth-Hamilton Hill: weekday evening service after 2100 reduced
    from 30 minutes to 60 minutes
-   150/160 East Perth-Booragoon–Fremantle: last service from Perth
    weeknights and last service from Fremantle Saturdays one hour
    earlier.
-   464/465 Whitfords-Joondalup: weekday late evening services
    discontinued.
-   469 Whitfords-Wangara: pm outward, am inward services discontinued.
-   500 Bull Creek-Booragoon: weekday 0653 service from Bull Creek
    discontinued.
-   501 Bull Creek-Fremantle: Sunday services increased from 30 minutes
    to 15 minutes.
-   505 Bull Creek-Murdoch: weekday service reduced from 60 minutes to
    120 minutes.
-   510 Murdoch-Booragoon: Saturday and Sunday evening services
    discontinued.
-   530 Cockburn Central-Fremantle: extra schooldays trip am from
    Cockburn Central and pm from South Fremantle Senior High School.
-   568 Warnbro-Baldivis: the weekday 1448 journey departing Baldivis
    Secondary Collage is now operated by an articulated bus and the 1450
    journey departing Baldivis Secondary College is now extended to
    Fifty Road.
-   950 Morley-QE II Medical Centre: earlier starting times weekdays and
    Sundays and weekday pm contra-peak from Morley now operates until
    around 1800 before reducing to a 15 minute frequency.
-   Time changes on routes 16, 20, 60, 66, 68, 100, 352, 406, 450, 462,
    514, 532, 549 and 554.

**Thanks** to Jason Blackman, Hilaire Fraser, Craig Halsall, Jason
Holmes, Victor Isaacs Geoff Lambert, Michael Marshall, Peter Parker,
David Whiteford and various contributors on *Australian Transport
Discussion Board,* for Bus news.

# **AIR NEWS**

## **International**

**Virgin Australia** is dropping Abu Dhabi from its network before it
has even begun. It is concentrating its international long-haul flying
on routes to the United States and North Asia. It will no longer
commence Perth-Abu Dhabi nonstop flights that were scheduled [to begin
in
June](http://australianaviation.com.au/2016/09/virgin-australia-to-launch-perth-abu-dhabi-resume-melbourne-la-flights-in-long-haul-network-shakeup/).
This decision follows Virgin ending its thrice weekly Sydney-Abu Dhabi
flights in February. “Subsequent changes in market conditions have made
the route no longer viable for Virgin Australia,” Virgin said. Cutting
capacity to Abu Dhabi highlights Virgin’s increasing focus on North
America, where the airline is returning to the Melbourne-Los Angeles
route from 4 April after a two and a half year absence.

Virgin Australia will commence services between Melbourne and Hong Kong
from 5 July with five return services weekly. Flights depart HK at 1950
on Mon, Tue, Wed, Thur and Sat. Flights depart Melbourne on Mon, Wed,
Thur and Sat at varying times.

Virgin Australia commenced flights between Melbourne and Los Angeles on
4 April. Flights depart LA at 2055 on Tue, Thur, Fri, Sat and Sun, and
depart Melbourne at 1130 on Mon, Tue, Thur, Sat and Sun.

**Thanks** to Paul Brown, Victor Isaacs and *Australian Aviation* for
Air news

### **About *Table Talk***

***Table Talk*** is published monthly by the Australian Timetable
Association Inc. (Registration No. A0043673H) as a journal of record
covering recent timetable news items. The ATA also publishes the
***Times*** covering timetable history and analysis. Contributions are
invited and are very welcome. Please send these to the appropriate
Editor. ABN 74248483468.

The **deadline** **for *Table Talk*** is the second last weekend of the
month, but contributions are welcome at all times.

**Editor, Rail and Tram, Air, Ferry:** Victor Isaacs,
***[tabletalk@austta.org.au](mailto:tabletalk@timetable.org.au)*** 11 Blacket St Downer ACT 2602.

**Editor,** **Bus**: As an interim arrangement, please send your Bus
news to ***[tabletalk@austta.org.au](mailto:tabletalk@timetable.org.au)***

**Production and Mailout**: Geoff and Judy Lambert.

**Proofreaders:** Agnes Boskovitz, David Cranney and Geoff Hassall.

Original material appearing in ***Table Talk*** may be reproduced in
other publications but acknowledgement is required.

**Membership of the Australian Timetable Association** includes monthly
copies of the *Times*, *Table Talk*, the Distribution List of
timetables, and Auction catalogues. The membership fee is \$60 (Adult)
and \$36 (Junior) pa. Membership enquiries should be directed to the
Membership Officer, Len Regan, at ***[treasurer@austta.org.au](mailto:treasurer@timetable.org.au)***

Back issues of ***Table Talk*** are available on the Australian
Timetable Association’s website, ***[austta.org.au](https://www.timetable.org.au),*** after two months.

**Table Talk Newswire** is an advance monthly email of Rail news. To
obtain this, contact the Rail Editor.
