---
layout: page
title: Table Talk - December 2016
author: Australian Timetable Association
subject: Transportation
---
<div style=" font-family: TimesNewRoman, 'Times New Roman', Times, Baskerville, Georgia, serif;
            font-style: italic;
            font-weight: bold;
            font-size: 36pt;
            text-transform: uppercase;
            color: black;">TABLE TALK</div>

# **AUSTRALASIAN TIMETABLE NEWS**

**No. 292, December 2016 ISSN 1038-3697, RRP \$4.95**

**Published by the Australian Timetable Association**

[**www.austta.org.au**](https://www.timetable.org.au)

# **TOP TABLE TALK**

## **QUEENSLAND RAIL CITYTRAIN: TIMETABLE WOES**

A further interim timetable was introduced on Monday 7 November to deal
with continuing driver shortages. This had 333 less services a week than
the first interim timetable dated 25 October. This timetable was
expected to last for about two months with another new one to begin in
January 2017 when new fares commence. There were no weekend trains from
Ipswich to Rosewood except for two in each direction on late Saturday
afternoon (1635 and 1735 from Ipswich, 1705 and 1805 from Rosewood)!
Most lines had additional gaps between services. The Minister for
Transport, Stirling Hinchcliffe said “Queensland Rail has assured me
that this is a timetable people can rely on. This is a sustainable
timetable, which should have commenced when the Redcliffe Peninsula line
opened. The new timetable would free up tutor drivers to teach new
recruits, which is the longer term solution and a key part of the
Palaszczuk Government’s five-point plan to restore services and maintain
safety for the travelling public.”

Not surprisingly, the almost complete absence of weekend services on the
Ipswich-Rosewood line attracted criticism. Consequently, yet another
interim timetable was introduced only three days later on 10 November.
In this the meagre two trains per weekend Ipswich-Rosewood were removed,
but a full-time weekend bus service was introduced. Most of these buses
operate at the former permanent train weekend frequency of hourly. In
addition, there are eight express buses on Saturdays and six on Sundays.
Also, one round trip on this line on Friday afternoons was replaced by a
bus. The timetables were re-issued with the following words on the
front: “Effective 7 November 2016, Revised 10 November 2016.” Then from
Friday 18 November, QR amended the rail bus timetable between Ipswich
and Rosewood to leave at the time the train was tabled to depart. An
updated PDF timetable has been issued however the cover date still shows
10 November 2016. This change now results in a 27 minute connection time
between the Rail Bus and train at Ipswich. Previously it was 12 minutes.

The current interim timetables on the Translink website are at
<https://translink.com.au/service-updates/104191>

Friday 4 November was the worst day since the crisis began. 113 services
were cancelled. In early November, the Minister was facing political
calls for his resignation. Meanwhile, the Rail, Tram and Bus Union is
threatening strike action over a new enterprise agreement.

On 24 November the Queensland government upgraded the independent
investigation into Queensland Rail Train Crewing Practices to a
Commission of Inquiry so it can secure documents from the former Newman
government and QR. Phillip Strachan, who had been appointed to undertake
the independent investigation in October, will be a Commissioner with
his examination to now be a Commission of Inquiry. The Inquiry will
cover two sections.

Circumstances leading up to and associated with the disruptions to the
CityTrain timetable:

1.  The adequacy of Queensland Rail scheduling, rostering, training
    crewing, recruitment and training practices, including arrangements
    put in place to support the new timetable that commenced 4 October
    2016;
2.  What circumstances led to any inadequacies in part 1a;
3.  When deficits in train crew availability were known about and what
    action was taken ahead of the commissioning of the Redcliffe
    Peninsula line to address these issues; and
4.  The nature and suitability of actions taken by Queensland Rail once
    the train crewing issues manifested under the new timetable.

Implementation of the five point plan to restore timetabled services and
public confidence in Queensland Rail timetabling:

1.  Progress with the recruitment and training of the additional 200
    drivers (100 approved in November 2015, and 100 announced on 24
    October 2016) and 200 additional guards (100 approved in November
    2015, and 100 announced on 24 October 2016);
2.  Future demand and supply requirements for train crew, including for
    the crewing of New Generation Rollingstock;
3.  Ensuring the suitability of current and proposed Queensland Rail
    recruitment practices to address the issues in 2b;
4.  The development and delivery of the interim timetable; and
5.  The suitability of arrangements and timeframes to transition from
    the interim timetable to the full timetable.

**Graham Duffin** adds: The local media are having a field day at the
Government's and QR's expense and the Ipswich Mayor Paul Pisasale is
referring to them as "dumb and dumber.” It was made worse by the local
state member Jim Madden (a Govt. MP) being unaware of the weekend bus
replacement until it had started and the Transport Minister Stirling
Hinchliffe apparently finding out about it from Twitter on the weekend
it started. The *Queensland Times* (Ipswich) has had many articles about
it. To date no announcement has been made about when the weekend train
services between Ipswich and Rosewood will be restored.

***Comment:*** *Timetables matter. We have seen – years ago in New South
Wales, earlier this year in Victoria, and now in Queensland – that
unworkable timetables and/or sustained bad operations have significant
political implications for governments. Great plans and good intentions
must be accompanied by realistic planning and by attention to detail in
implementation. Business expertise on boards is important but there must
also be people with practical railway knowledge and experience.*

# **RAIL AND TRAM NEWS**

## **Infrastructure Australia recommendations**

On 23 November, Infrastructure Australia (IA) released its current
infrastructure priority list. IA is the Federal government’s independent
advisory body for infrastructure projects. Its categorisation affects
possible Federal government funding. Through this list, the IA aims to
identify nationally significant projects and initiatives in every state
and territory.

There are no rail projects in the High Priority category (the highest
category). Projects identified in this category are: Western Sydney
Airport, M4 Motorway upgrade Parramatta to Lapstone, WestConnex Motorway
Sydney, Ipswich Motorway Rocklea to Darra, M80 Western Ring Road upgrade
Melbourne, and Perth Freight Link (another road project).

Rail and/or Public Transport projects have been categorised as follows:

Priority Projects: Moorebank Intermodal Terminal Sydney, Adelaide to
Tarcoola railway upgrade acceleration (already underway), Brisbane to
Melbourne Inland Freight Railway;

High Priority initiatives (ie, projects still being developed): Sydney
Metro, Chatswood-Sydney CBD-Bankstown), Bus Rapid Transport (Sydney
Northern Beaches, Parramatta Road and Victoria Road), Southern Sydney to
CBD public transport enhancement, Brisbane Cross-River Rail, Gawler
Railway (Adelaide) upgrade, Cranbourne and Pakenham Railway (Melbourne)
upgrade, Cranbourne and Pakenham lines level crossings removal,
Melbourne Metro Rail, Port Botany (Sydney) freight railway duplication,
Chullora Junction (Sydney) upgrade, Port of Brisbane dedicated freight
rail connection, National freight and supply chain strategy, Outer
Sydney orbital road and rail corridor preservation, Western Sydney
Airport railway corridor preservation, Lower Hunter freight railway
corridor preservation, Western Sydney Freight railway and intermodal
terminal corridor preservation, East Coast High Speed Railway corridor
preservation;

Priority Initiatives: Western line Sydney CBD to Parramatta upgrade,
Public Transport access to Parramatta CBD, Gold Coast Tramway stage 2
(already underway), AdeLINK Tram Network, Melbourne level crossings
removal (already underway), Melbourne Airport to CBD public transport
capacity, Melton (outer western Melbourne) railway upgrade (already
underway), Canberra public transport improvements, Port Kembla freight
railway access, Moorebank Intermodal Terminal (Sydney) road connection
upgrade, Northern Sydney Freight Corridor stage 2 (Additional tracks
West Ryde-Rhodes and Thornleigh-Hornsby), Southern Sydney freight line
upgrade, Lower Hunter freight corridor construction, Newcastle-Sydney
line upgrades, Wollongong-Sydney line upgrades, Western Sydney Airport
public transport connection, Beerburrum-Nambour (outer northern
Brisbane) rail upgrades, Mount Isa-Townsville rail upgrades, Gawler
Craton (central South Australia) freight rail connection for minerals,
Melbourne-Adelaide-Perth rail upgrades, Murray Basin (Victoria) rail
upgrades (already underway), ARTC Advanced Train Management System
implementation.

IA’s completed assessments of specific projects can be found at
<http://infrastructureaustralia.gov.au/projects/project-assessments.aspx>

The Prime Minister told the House of Representatives on 24 November that
the Government’s five key initiatives were:

-   “We will agree urban rail plans with willing state governments for
    our five biggest cities - the mainland state capitals - that will
    inform our future investment priorities.
-   We will continue reforms to heavy vehicle user charging.
-   We will appoint an eminent Australian to lead extensive community
    consultation on the costs and benefits of road pricing for all
    vehicles.
-   We will develop a strategy to increase the productivity and
    efficiency of Australia’s freight supply chain.
-   And we will collect and publicly release data on the performance of
    transport services, including freight and passenger services, so
    that we can target improvements to these essential elements in our
    infrastructure.”

Mr Turnbull said the Government is supporting 69 of Infrastructure
Australia’s 78 recommendations and had committed funding towards 14 of
the 15 projects on IA’s Priority List. He said that the first stages of
construction will start next year on the Melbourne to Brisbane inland
freight railway. He also said that the Government is investing over \$4
billion in public transport to provide genuine alternatives for
commuters, ease congestion and improve access in our cities and suburbs.

## **Queensland: Cattle and freight trains**

Queensland Department of Transport has called tenders for operation of
cattle and general freight trains on inland lines from 1 January 2018
until 31 December 2022, with the option of two one-year extensions. The
current operator is Aurizon.

## **Queensland: Kingaroy line**

A proposed coal mine at Kingaroy could result in the re-opening of the
Theebine-Kingaroy branch line, 131 km.

## **Bromelton freight terminals**

**SCT** aims to run its first train service from Melbourne to its newly
developed Bromelton Intermodal estate, south of Brisbane, in January.
Bromelton’s completion will mark ‘the final piece of the puzzle" for
SCT’s entry onto the North-South Rail Corridor, it says. Expected to
have a capacity of 1.3 million tonnes of freight a year, the \$30
million terminal connects directly into the existing standard gauge
interstate rail line. The 134ha site features a 10,500 square metre
cross dock terminal, a 5,000sqm container handling area and more than
7.3km of internal rail track.

"Whilst the North South corridor continues to be dominated by the road
industry, we’re confident that our approach to this particular corridor
complemented by SCT’s unique rail model, will allow us to provide a
strong and unique value proposition to the market," SCT Logistics CEO
Glenn Smith says. "Our new Queensland facility will also allow us to
expand our business in key regional areas such as Wodonga, whilst
enhancing our capabilities on the Melbourne to Brisbane and Adelaide to
Brisbane rail corridor will provide competitive and flexible rail
solutions to customers going into and out of the state."

Whilst already servicing the Brisbane market, the company reckons its
own independent rail services will broaden its service offering and
provide customers with the opportunity to utilise its integrated rail
network and expanded national footprint.

"This major investment will allow SCT to run a number of weekly services
into and out of Brisbane, connecting businesses from Western Australia,
South Australia and Victoria directly into the Queensland market," SCT
says.

The **Australian Rail Track Corporation** (ARTC) has purchased nearly
846 hectares of land at Bromelton ARTC CEO John Fullerton said., “Given
the site’s strategic location and the intended scope for the area to see
an intermodal logistics hub or ‘inland port’ to be developed over time –
it was important we looked at the opportunity closely when the land
became available. The land is the only area on the eastern seaboard with
current direct access to the interstate railway line between Melbourne
and Brisbane. The site is also adjacent to B-double transport routes
that are less than one hour’s drive from the Port of Brisbane and the
Brisbane CBD. It’s no secret that we see North-South freight flows
between Melbourne and Brisbane as a pivotal growth market and that
modern terminal development is essential to enabling this.”

There are no immediate plans by ARTC to develop the Bromelton site, but
early planning for that process will start over coming months.

Bromelton is not only on ARTC’s existing north-south mainline, but also
on the proposed future Brisbane-Melbourne Inland Freight Railway.

## **Sydney Trains: Infrastructure**

Signalling between Wynyard and Waverton was modified from 12 December to
improve headways. This could facilitate future running of more than 20
trains an hour, in the peak, across the Harbour Bridge.

Overhead wiring was removed from Sydney Mortuary platform from 21
November.

## **Sydney Trains: 21 January and October 2017 timetables**

A new Sydney timetable will be introduced from 21 January 2017.

A new timetable is proposed for Sydney Trains in October 2017. Among the
changes being considered is an all stations service from the City Circle
to Parramatta, using the new Parramatta turnback.

## **Sydney: Parramatta Metro**

On 14 November NSW Premier Mike Baird announced a \$10 billion metro
rail line from the City to Parramatta via the Bays Precinct and Olympic
Park. The State government will use money from the [\$16 billion sale of
Ausgrid as well as private
investment](http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/nsw-power-sale-state-switched-on-for-success/news-story/b108477a5fecda8e25ab5b914232267a)
to construct the project, which has been dubbed “Sydney Metro West”. The
line will be largely underground and operate with double-deck,
driverless trains. It will relieve pressure on the Western line, [which
is nearing 100%
capacity](http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/fairgowest/the-trains-of-western-sydney-time-to-solve-the-missing-link/news-story/6c98fe7f8ef8eb302a64ad1c1dc7247e).
The government is promising to have the line operational in the second
half of the 2020s, and Mr Baird will announce that work will begin
within five years. Community consultation will be undertaken and the
exact alignment announced in late 2018.

It is understood the government would be open to the concept of
extending the line west beyond Parramatta and east beyond the City,
perhaps to Malabar.

Mr Baird said, “The addition of a metro line in Western Sydney will
effectively double rail capacity between Parramatta and Sydney and
transform the way we get around our city forever. This is the first step
— we’ve identified the need for this project, we’re committing the
government to delivering it and today we begin the work to bring metro
rail to Western Sydney.”

Rail stations would be established at Parramatta, where the number of
jobs is expected to double in the next 20 years to 100,000, and Sydney
Olympic Park, where 34,000 jobs and more than 23,000 residents will be
located by 2030. The line would also stop at the Bays Precinct, which is
expected to become Sydney’s innovation hub with 95ha of land to be
regenerated and Google to be based there. It would terminate in the CBD,
where passengers will be able to change to the other new Metro lines as
well as the existing public transport network.

The Transport Minister, Mr Constance said, “Customers won’t need a
timetable on this 21st century turn-up-and-go system, which will deliver
new capacity and more services for generations to come. This new rail
line will be able to move about 40,000 people an hour in each direction,
delivering a massive boost to public transport. It will also mean faster
and more frequent services will be able to be delivered on the Sydney
Trains network from other major centres like Penrith and Blacktown.”

## **Sydney Tramway to Pagewood?**

Property development company Meriton is proposing extension of the
Sydney Eastern Suburbs Tramway, presently under construction, from the
terminus at Kingsford Junction via Bunnerong Road to a major development
at Pagewood. Meriton’s principal, Harry Triguboff, has confirmed the
company would contribute millions of dollars towards the cost under the
“value capture” concept of developers contributing to transport.

## **Sydney of the future**

The Greater Sydney Commission released a vision of Sydney in 2056. It
envisages three major centres: around the existing City, Parramatta, and
Badgery’s Creek Airport. Details are at
<http://www.greatersydneycommission.nsw.gov.au/towards-our-greater-sydney-2056>

## **NSW Trainlink: Patronage**

NSW Trainlink’s 2015-16 Annual Report show patronage of Intercity trains
(ie, outer Sydney electrics & DMUs) was 38,452,744 (an increase of
11.31%), Regional trains (ie, long-distance XPTs and Xplorers) was
1,246,669 (increase of 1.82%) (increase on Melbourne and Canberra
trains; decrease on Dubbo train), and Regional buses was 510,309
(decrease of 4.89%).

## **NSW TrainLink: New trains**

On 28 October the NSW Minister for Transport, Andrew Constance,
announced the allocation of \$50 million to speed up procurement of new
trains to replace the XPTs. The procurement process will begin early
next year, two years earlier than hitherto planned. Opportunities to
replace the Xplorer and Endeavour DMUs will also be investigated. Unkind
people pointed to the proximity of a by-election in Orange to the
announcement.

## **ARHS, ACT & NSW TrainLink: Canberra & Queanbeyan**

The Canberra-based **Australian Railway Historical Society, Australian
Capital Territory Division** has been one of the most active railfan
groups in Australia for many years. In recent years, the ARHS, ACT has
expanded into various rail related activities. It overreached itself and
has gone into significant debt. On 16 November the ARHS, ACT therefore
went into liquidation.

All rail operations by the ARHS, ACT have now ceased and its
accreditation as a rail operator has been suspended.

(November’s *Table Talk* (page 11) referred to the demise of **Espee
Rail**, a subsidiary of the ARHS, ACT. At that time, the Editor was
discreet and did not include that Espee’s closure was another symptom of
the ARHS, ACT’s financial troubles).

There were, in fact, two unusual events at the relatively small station
of **Queanbeyan** that week.

Queanbeyan station was the site of the only railfan operated railway
booking agency in Australasia. The ARHS, ACT had operated this for about
25 years. When the ARHS, ACT went into liquidation, all activities were
closed, including the Queanbeyan railway booking agency. The agency was
trading profitably. However, not surprisingly, Transport NSW will not
conduct business with an entity that is in administration.

In an unrelated event, from 12 to 17 November Queanbeyan station was
closed to enable the platform to be rebuilt. On the weekend of 12/13
November this was part of a general closedown for civil engineering
works on the NSW Southern line between Sydney suburbs and Queanbeyan.
From 14 to 17 November **TrainLink**’s passenger trains still operated,
but passed through Queanbeyan non-stop. Passengers were bussed the wrong
way to and from Canberra to join trains. TrainLink produced two large
posters, just for this one station. One poster provided a general
explanation, and the other gave the times of the substitute buses,
including of empty running between Queanbeyan and Canberra and v.v.

## **NSW: Blayney-Port Kembla freight**

In September Pacific National ceased operation of the Blayney-Port
Kembla concentrates train, and Qube took over this service. Qube is
using the new Sealink sidings east of Blayney, rather than Blayney yard.
Qube is operating three or four trains a week.

## **NSW transport information**

From December, NSW train passengers will be able to receive personalised
messages through Twitter, letting them know if their daily journey is
disrupted on the suburban and intercity networks. Minister for Transport
and Infrastructure Andrew Constance announced the partnership with
Twitter, which is an Australian-first, set to individualise transport
information. The pilot will run for three months. If the technology
proves successful, Transport for NSW will look to work with buses,
ferries and light rail to improve mobile personal messaging.

On 2 November, Mr Constance announced a trial of public transport
services that arrive when and where commuters need them. “We have
Netflix, Stan, and Foxtel to give us movies on demand – so why can’t we
have our public transport respond to where people are and what they
want?” he said. “Imagine a NSW where you don’t need to check the
timetable because the right numbers of trains, buses or ferries arrive
when and where they need to. This future is not far off if we are quick
off the mark today. This is why we are calling on industry and tech
leaders to get involved and submit expressions of interest to run the
trial, which will be working by the end of 2017. I want to see the end
of timetables, and a network that can cut down on travel delays by
automatically putting on extra trains in wet weather or extra buses from
a footy team’s home suburbs to away games,” he said.

Data, including how people travel, weather, and special events, will be
used to create public transport planning changes in real time – a
timetable that is flexible and responds to what customers need. Mr
Constance said the trials could include special bus services on suburban
routes that respond to where and when extra buses are needed.
Expressions of interest for the on demand transport trial will be
released in December 2016 with responses from industry due by February
2017. Following an evaluation period, all pilot programs are expected to
be operational by the end of 2017.

## **ARTC: Victorian NE**

The ARTC undertook intensive work on the Victorian NE line between 9-16
November and 21-28 November. It is reported that mud holes have
re-appeared in places along the line.

## **V/Line; Working Timetable (NSP) 26 June**

Since mid-November V/Line’s Working Timetables (aka Network Service
Plan) of 26 June 2016 have been on their website at
<https://corporate.vline.com.au/Network-Access/Network-service-plan>,
although the documents are undated.

We must acknowledge with gratitude the work by ATA member Richard Talbot
in his persistent submissions to V/Line that its current Network Service
Plans be uploaded promptly onto the V/Line website. V/Line has now
advised him that it has “recently modified the system to allow the
working tables to be automatically updated when there is a change. This
will ensure that the NSP is updated swiftly, corresponding with the
release of new timetables”.

**Geoff Lambert** adds: “Although it contains a few formatting glitches,
the 2016 NSP is a vast improvement on the 2015 NSP. The 2016 NSP has
been enhanced with information on train rostering—the backbone of a
“zig-zag diagram”. The pages of the Central Region have been split into
two parts – passenger services which transit the Region and empty car
and light engine movements confined within the Region. The effects of
the VLocity “wheel crisis” of early 2016 can be seen in the various
changes to platform use at Southern Cross station, with many more
service routed away from the notorious North Melbourne Flyover. There
has been a considerable rearrangement of the loco-hauled services,
principally by switching 4VN with VN sets and v*ice versa*. As mentioned
elsewhere in this issue of *Table Talk*, use of the new Rowsley Loop has
been indefinitely postponed. The 016 NSP has finally seen the
“retirement” of 2-car (2VL) VLocity sets. Since the NSP was issued, a
number of minor amendments to services have been made by S-Notice,
principally due to the arrival of the next batch of VLocity cars. The
travel times of the NESG services were extended by five minutes over the
time that have been in effect since the start of the services. The
Freight NSP is also on the web-site but is modified more frequently that
the Passenger NSP, most often because of changes of operators for some
services.

“ATA has reformatted and amalgamated the full set of NSP tables and all
its supporting documents into a single 511-page document. This will be
made available in ATA’s December Distribution List, along with
equivalent NSP documents (including a full logistical analysis) for the
June 2015 NSP. 2016 is the 20^th^ anniversary of the issuance of this
timetable under the “NSP” banner and the 37^th^ anniversary of the
disappearance of it under the old name of “Working Time Table”. ATA was
only six years old when this happened. Some of our members were born
after the WTT disappeared!”

## **V/Line & Metro Trains: 29 January 2017 timetable**

New V/Line and Metro Trains timetables will be introduced from 29
January 2017. The V/Line timetable will substantially introduce the
major improvements foreshadowed in the 2016 Victorian Budget –
approximately 172 additional services a week. The Minster states: "The
80 new regional train services are the first of more than 170 announced
as part of the 2016-17 Victorian Budget, and are on top of the 340 new
services the Labor Government introduced last year. Another timetable
change is scheduled for mid-next year, which will introduce even more
regional services:”

***South Western: Geelong additional 52 and Warrnambool additional 12 =
64***\
Weekdays - Additional loco hauled Warrnambool - Geelong return trip 0745
Up and 1700 Down with cross platform transfers at Geelong to VLocity
services. Geelong Weekday evenings goes to every 40 minutes instead of
hourly, all trains to Waurn Ponds.\

Saturdays - Geelong between 0700 and 1900 goes from hourly to every 40
minutes with all services to/from Waurn Ponds.\

Sundays- Warrnambool additional return loco hauled to/from Melbourne.
Believed to be 1300 Up and 1700 Down. Geelong between 0700 and 1900 goes
from hourly to every 40 minutes with all services to/from Waurn Ponds.

***Western - Ballarat: additional 28 and Maryborough additional 10 =
38***\

Weekdays – Day mainly every 40 minutes instead of hourly, with a Down
and Midday Up extension to/from Maryborough.\

Weekends - Two extra return trips each day, standardizing service
frequency.

***Northern – Bendigo: additional 28***\

Daily - Two extra return trips to standardise service frequency.

***North Eastern / Goulburn Valley: additional 14***\

Daily - An extra return trip to Shepparton, as extensions of existing
Seymour services, but as loco hauled trains.

***Eastern: additional 28***\

Daily -Two extra Traralgon return trips standardising service frequency.

## **V/Line: Warrnambool line**

The Warranmbool line was closed on 17 November following the faulty
performance of boom gates. Trains were to be replaced by buses for at
least a week. V/Line spokesman Rob Curtain said the lights, bells and
boom gates did not activate in time shaving off five seconds of the
warning time. “Safety is our number one priority. Any variation to our
time frames for activation is taken seriously,” he said. “There was no
danger to passengers, staff or road users.”

Since October there have been speed reductions through 17 level
crossings between Geelong and Warranmbool where there is limited line of
sight. The incident has pushed V/Line to reduce further risk by extra
inspections, vegetation reduction, and the reconfiguring of frequencies
and other settings at level crossings. Motion detectors to activate the
crossings are also being adjusted to provide the maximum warning,
regardless of train speed.

## **V/Line: Ballarat line**

A project team within the existing Melbourne Metro Rail Authority will
oversee the \$518 million upgrade of the Ballarat line. The project
includes duplication of 18 km from Deer Park West junction to Melton and
a three km section west of Warrenheip, new crossing loops and train
stabling, second platforms at Bacchus Marsh and Ballan, and extension of
the existing platforms at Rockbank.

The on-time performance on the Ballarat line for the twelve months
ending September 2016 was 87.1%. In September this had improved to
91.6%, which is attributed to the 26 June timetable and to the opening
of Rowsley crossing loop. (No trains are scheduled to cross at Rowsley
in the current timetable, but it is useful for out of course crossings.
It is believed it will come into regular use with the January 2017
timetable.) Since the opening of the Regional Rail Link in June 2015,
patronage on the Ballarat corridor has increased by 12.5%. Almost a
quarter of all V/Line trips are taken on the Ballarat corridor, with
more than 335,000 trips in September 2016.

## **Metro Trains Melbourne: Altona direct trains**

From 30 January 2017, five weekday return services will be extended
through the Altona Loop direct to Flinders St. Between 0900 and 1100,
the trains will stop at all stations between Laverton and Flinders St.
The new timetable for Altona Loop services will be available at
[ptv.vic.gov.au](http://ptv.vic.gov.au) from early January

## **Metro Trains Melbourne: Mernda extension**

Construction of the extension from South Morang to Mernda will begin
next year, and trains are expected to be running on the new line by
2019. John Holland have been awarded a \$600 million construction
contract including two intermediate stations. Weekday patronage is
projected at 8,000 daily.

## **Metro Trains Melbourne: Infrastructure**

To allow for the construction of new stabling sidings at Pakenham East
for Metro Trains, the boundary between Metro Trains and V/Line has been
moved four kms in the down direction.

Control of Sunshine was transferred to Metrol on 23 October. Sunshine
signal box is abolished.

## **Metro Trains Melbourne: System closedown**

On Friday 11 November at about 2000 Metro Trains’ Metrol (central
control room) was evacuated in response to what was later determined to
be a false alarm. The entire system was closed for about 30 minutes.
Delays continued for the rest of the evening.

## **South Australia: Freight**

The SA Government has awarded a \$200,000 grant for Bowmans Rail to
establish an intermodal terminal near Leigh Creek in northern SA.
Regional Development Minister Geoff Brock said the inland regional port
will provide an integrated road and rail service from Adelaide to the
Cooper Basin, reducing inbound freight costs and creating transport
efficiencies. The Leigh Creek line has been without trains since
carriage of coal to the now-closed Port Augusta power station ceased in
early 2016.

“Bowmans Rail, through the Leigh Creek Intermodal, will provide an
alternative transport method to cater for the oil and gas industry in
the Far North, broadening the competitiveness of the region and
improving its economic prosperity,” Brock said. “This project, with the
support of the Upper Spencer Gulf and Outback Futures Program, will
stimulate new business activity, support community sustainability and
create job opportunities for the region. Establishing the Leigh Creek
intermodal will invest a project total of \$800,000 into the local
economy and create five new ongoing positions.”

Bowmans Rail chief executive Scott McKay said the company was grateful
for the grant, which he said would greatly assist construction of the
facility. “With this project we aim to service the oil and gas industry
in the Cooper Basin and make future exploration more attractive by
reducing supply costs and providing an opportunity to transfer minerals
from this emerging region to export market,” he said. “Bowmans Rail
provides an integrated, high-value service to its customers and we look
forward to offering additional value-add opportunities for South
Australia’s resource sector with this new intermodal container
terminal.”

Northline is to expand beyond its existing north-south intermodal
business into east-west intermodal traffic. Its terminal at Regency
Park, Adelaide, conveniently next to Pacific National’s terminal, will
be expanded at a cost of \$23 million.

## **NZ: Shaky Isles 14 November**

The main effect of the earthquake centred on the north-east of NZ’s
South Island early on the morning of 14 November is significant damage
to the Christchurch-Picton line. It is believed that about 32 km of
track was destroyed. It is expected to be a long time before the line is
re-opened.

On 14 November all train services in Wellington - suburban and
long-distance - were suspended. Bus services did not commence until
about 0800. Ferry services were cancelled. People were urged not to
travel into Wellington CBD. KiwiRail cancelled the Coastal Pacific
(Christchurch-Picton and return), the TranzAlpine
(Christchurch-Greymouth and return), Capital Connection (Palmerston
North-Wellington and return) and Interislander ferry services until full
assessments were made. The Northern Explorer operated on that day only
between Auckland and Palmerston North, rather than all the way into
Wellington. KiwiRail suspended freight trains south of Palmerston North
and north of Christchurch. A freight train was stopped in its journey
near Kaikoura on the line from Christchurch to Picton.

On the following day, Tuesday 15 November, the Northern Explorer started
from Palmerston North. Other services returned to normal, except there
were no trains on the Christchurch-Picton line, including the Coastal
Pacific passenger train. Interislander ferries resumed for vehicles and
freight, but not for foot passengers, due to wharf damage at Picton.

## **Auckland patronage**

Total public transport patronage in Auckland for September 2016
increased by 3.4% compared with twelve months earlier. Train patronage
was up by 13.8% - the result of the full electrification services
operating. (Buses were up 0.4%, and ferries up by 6.7%.)

## **Swiss Timetable final publication**

The very fine, comprehensive Swiss rail, bus, ferry and mountain railway
Timetables will be published in December for the last time. From 2018
they will only be available on the internet. The final edition will
include the new passenger train services through the new 57 km Gotthard
Base Tunnel, with other associated changes.

If anyone is interested in obtaining one of these timetables, they can
be ordered through ATA. The timetables weigh 3kg, so the postage cost is
very high. When converted to Australian dollars, the timetables cost
\$23 and the postage \$80, a total of \$103 at the current currency
conversion rate. To reduce costs, the timetables will be sent direct
from Fahrplancenter in Switzerland to your own postal address. If you
are interested, please contact Len Regan by phone on 0409 209 114 or by
email at <treasurer@austta.org.au> and he will place the order for you.
Your payment will be made to ATA.

## **Thanks**
to Tony Bailey, Scott Ferris, Hilaire Fraser, Craig Halsall,
Victor Isaacs, Geoff Lambert, Dennis McLean, Chris Pandilovski, Samuel
Rachdi, Len Regan, Michael Smith, Richard Talbot,
*[www.railexpress.com.au](http://www.railexpress.com.au),
[www.railpage.com.au](http://www.railpage.com.au), Catchpoint* (National
Railway Museum), *Australian, Age, Courier-Mail, Daily Telegraph, Herald
Sun* and the *Sydney Morning Herald* for Rail news.

# **RECOMMENDED READING**

The Bureau of Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Economics has issued useful new Fact Sheets, *Five facts about commuting in Australia* and *A dozen facts about transport in Australia.* See <https://bitre.gov.au/>

BITRE, in association with the Australasian Railway Association, have
released *Trainline 4*. It documents growth in passenger journeys and
freight movements in 2014-15. Rail freight movements in Australia grew
11% in 12 months, transporting 1.23 billion net tonnes in 2014-15, up
from 1.11 billion tonnes in 2013-14. Passenger patronage grew 5% in 12
months, providing 849.48 million passenger journeys during 2014-15 or
2.3 million passenger journeys every day. Rail freight now moves almost
half of Australia’s national freight task, a huge jump from
approximately 36% in 2000. It can be accessed at
<https://bitre.gov.au/publications/2016/train_004.aspx>

# **BUS NEWS**

## **New South Wales**

The NSW Government is expected to seek tenders for services presently
operated by **Sydney Buses.** Keolis Downer and Transit Systems are
eager to bid, but their bids may encounter opposition from unions, which
fear it will lead to cuts to drivers' wages and conditions, as well as
bus routes deemed unprofitable. The contract to operate a new bus
corridor known as the "B-Line" from Sydney's CBD to the lower north
shore and northern beaches from next year is also expected to be opened
up to private companies.

While private companies such as Hillsbus and Transdev operate bus
services in Sydney, STA-run Sydney Buses carries most of the city's bus
passengers. The STA contracts cover the CBD, the northern beaches,
Parramatta, the eastern suburbs and south to suburbs such as Mascot. It
has 12 depots in Sydney and about 3700 drivers, almost all of whom are
members of the Rail, Tram and Bus Union.

Transport for NSW said a decision had yet to be made on the STA
contracts, which would expire in mid-2018. The contracts had an option
for the transport authority to extend them for up to two years, a
spokesman said. The "proposed service approach" for the operation of the
B-Line bus services to the northern suburbs was also still under
consideration, he said.

Tenders for Newcastle Buses have also been sought.

The following routes run without timetables, as directed on fine summer
days. They do not appear on websites or in Trip Planners:

-   X24 operates express from Circular Quay to Watsons Bay (stopping
    only at Double Bay and Rose Bay) on Boxing Day for the Sydney-Hobart
    Yacht Race. From October 2015 it has also been seen operating on
    fine summer weekends park St-Watsons Bay.\

-   X80 ran in 2000 from Park St via Bondi Road to Bondi Beach-in
    conjunction with the City2Surf in August. It was renumbered X81
    in 2001. By 2011 the route had been altered outwards via Birriga
    Road and Curlewis St, inwards via Curlewis St and Old South Head
    Road. It runs as directed on fine summer weekends, holidays and some
    week days.\

-   X82 was first noted running Bondi Beach-St James station to convey
    crowds to the start of the City2Surf from 2006.

New and additional **Sydney Buses** services from Sunday 20 and Monday
21 November include:

North Shore and Northern Beaches

-   35 additional weekly trips on **routes 270, 271 and 274** between
    Terrey Hills, Davidson, Belrose, Frenchs Forest and the City, during
    shoulder peak times.\

-   30 additional weekly trips on **route 197** between Mona Vale and
    Macquarie Park via Terrey Hills and Gordon, providing additional
    trips on weeknights.\

-   25 additional weekly trips on **route 196** between Mona Vale and
    Terrey Hills, on weeknights.\

-   These service changes commenced Monday 21 November.

Inner West and Northern Suburbs

-   102 additional weekly trips on **route M41** between Burwood and
    Macquarie Park via Concord Hospital and Ryde, providing extended
    hours of operation to midnight every night, with services running
    every 30 minutes after 2100. There were also be minor timetable
    adjustments resulting in some altered departure times during the
    day.\

-   Seven additional weekly trips on **route 438** between Abbotsford
    and the City via Five Dock and Leichhardt, providing services
    running throughout the night on Fridays and Saturdays.

Southern Sydney

-   272 weekly trips on new **route 985** between Cronulla and Miranda,
    serving the [Woolooware Bay
    development](http://www.transportnsw.info/en/transport-status/news/detail.page?news=templatedata/Content/News-Article/data/2016/woolooware-bay-bus-services.xml).

Western Sydney

-   76 new and additional weekly trips on **routes 749, 757 and 778** in
    the St Marys, Marsden Park and Riverstone districts.\

    -   New **route 749,** providing weekday peak hour services between
        Marsden Park and Blacktown approximately every 30 minutes
        (towards Marsden Park in the morning and towards Blacktown in
        the afternoon).\

    -   **Route 751** between Blacktown and Colebee was extended to and
        from Marsden Park, providing new peak hour services between
        Marsden Park and Colebee.\

    -   **Route 757** operates via Elara Estate at Marsden Park on
        weekdays and Saturdays.\

    -   **Route 778** between St Marys and Claremont Meadows was be
        extended to provide new daily services to Caddens.\

    -   Selected trips on weekday **route 781** between Penrith and St
        Marys diverted via Caddens.\

-   Minor timetable changes to departure times for other St Marys
    district routes, including **750, 754, 755, 756, 758, 770 and 771.**

Blue Mountains

-   47 additional weekly trips on **route 686** between Katoomba, Echo
    Point and Scenic World, providing new morning and afternoon peak
    trips and additional weekend trips. During daylight saving (October
    to April), **route 686** runs two later evening trips on Saturdays
    and Sundays. In addition, existing trips that only run during school
    holidays on Sunday were converted to run on all Sundays throughout
    the year.

Central Coast

-   Four additional weekly trips on **route 40** between North Gosford
    to Gosford to provide earlier and later trips on weekends.\

-   Diversion of most weekday and all weekend **route 40** services to
    run to and from Wyoming Shopping Village.

There are new State Transit timetables for the October timetable change
for:\
  136, 137, L60, 155, 156, 158, E86, 182, E83, 185, E85,
L85 (also with the timetable for temporary route 181).


**Blue Mountains Transit** has changes for Upper Blue Mountains route
686 from 20 November.

It is believed that there were to be changes to **Transdev** route 925
in late November.

## **Queensland**

**Brisbane Transport** is introducing new timetables for most routes
effective 12 December to allow for CBD street closures as a result of
the Queens Wharf Resort Development and to better reflect traffic
conditions. The new timetables are in the Translink format with green
covers in use for private operators since January 2014. Exceptions are
the 30 Spring Hill and 40/50 City Loop services which have yellow and
red covers respectively. The new timetables show the new fare zones
effective 9 January 2017 and have a banner to this effect on their
cover. The new Sunshine Coast and Nambour timetables effective 23
January 2017 to incorporate the changes described in the September
*Table Talk* are available on-line and also show the new fare zones.
**Logan City Bus Services** also have new timetables effective 12
December for 555 and 572/3/4/5 as does **Bus Queensland** for P546.

Details of the new **Nambour** bus network from 23 January 2017 are at
<https://translink.com.au/about-translink/projects-and-initiatives/nambour>

## **Tasmania**

**Metro** is perceived to have a large fleet of old buses, but the fact
is now official. Metro’s latest Annual Report states the current fleet
is by far the oldest in Australia, with the average age at 16.3 years.
It is hoped that the purchase of 100 new buses will result in a decrease
in the average age to 11.6 years – a figure more in line with other
state capital city operators. Delivery of the first of seven new Scania
articulated buses for Hobart is scheduled for March 2017. Five of these
new buses will replace the last of the Volvo B10M artics which date from
1986-87, while the other two will facilitate growth in the number of
services operated by articulated buses.

Metro’s Annual Report for 2015-16 reported that a 25% increase in
boardings on buses operating between the University campus at Newnham
and the Launceston CBD on a new “Turn Up and Go” service led to the
University of Tasmania continuing to assist Metro to fund the expanded
service in 2016.

In an ongoing operation to improve the level of Metro’s compliance with
the Disability Standards for Accessible Transport 2002 for bus stop
infrastructure, Metro is rolling out an upgrade of bus stops and
shelters in Berriedale, Chigwell, Claremont, Montrose and Rosetta. Part
of this program is to eliminate stops very close to other stops, to
reduce the number of stops requiring an upgrade and speed up the
service. From 31 October 2016 ten stops in Claremont, Chigwell and
Rosetta were removed.

## **Victoria**

### **Cranbourne’s hand-me-downs**

As reported in the November *Table Talk*, Sunday 13 November saw the
introduction of a new Cranbourne bus network, with four new services
introduced (792, 863, 890 and 899), with more frequent and streamlined
services across a further thirteen routes (789, 790, 791, 796, 798, 799,
843, 847, 891, 892, 893, 897 and 898). Two poorly patronised circular
routes in central Cranbourne (797 and 896) were withdrawn.\
\
Cranbourne Transit (Pulitano Group) has reportedly ordered eighteen new
Scania K310UB Volgrens to cater for the upgrade, but only seven had
arrived in time for the introduction of the new timetable. As a result,
seven second hand Volvo B10Bs ex Sita Bus Lines are being used to
deliver the Monday to Friday timetable. These buses, which retain the
orange and white Sita livery, were purchased via auction to replace the
former State Transit Mercedes Benz O405s at the sister Mansfield Mt
Buller Bus Lines operation for their ski fields shuttles – two had
already spent time up there this winter, and are operating signwritten
for MMBL!

All four remaining Volvo B10Ms in Cranbourne Transit fleet with
traditional black and white Phillips colours are also being used, with
sightings of up to ten high floors out on route duties across a single
peak. They have also been heavily used during the day on weekdays.
Although unusual, it is reminiscent of previous upgrades at Cardinia
Transit and Peninsula Bus Lines in the 2000s, where older buses in the
Grenda fleet were called back to route duty until newbies arrived.

The former Sita units retain roller blind destinations, which posed
challenges for both drivers and passengers trying to adjust to the new
network, with paper route number signs displayed in the windscreens. The
vehicles are fitted with bus tracking equipment but passengers enjoy a
free ride, as myki devices were removed prior to being sold.

After becoming accustomed to low floor buses on almost all services in
the outer south-east for several years now, this mass return of high
floor vehicles has caused issues for some passengers. People in
wheelchairs have been left on the side of the road for the next bus,
while those with prams and shopping jeeps have struggled to board and
alight. Online and printed timetables incorrectly advise a fully
accessible service, when about a fifth of trips aren’t – cases of
consecutive high floor trips on the same route have been observed.

Ventura’s Dandenong and Pakenham depots received eight new Volvo B7RLEs
in the weeks leading up to the new timetable, and have been able to
maintain a fully accessible service.

A number of significant signage issues have further challenged
passengers and your bus news correspondent has been in contact with PTV
to get these rectified. PTV’s new interactive “Melbourne by Bus” map was
not promptly updated with the changes, with the new routes only
appearing towards the end of the second week of operation of the
upgraded network. A new local area PDF for Casey has been uploaded to
the PTV website along with incomplete versions for Frankston and Greater
Dandenong that fail to show all the changes. At the end of November
revised maps were yet to be provided for Cardinia or Knox.

### **Ventura updates**

Further Ventura routes are receiving timetable updates from 4 December
to improve service reliability with more accurate runtimes and revised
train connections (many timetables were unchanged since the Grenda
takeover in January 2012). Arrival and departure times have varied up to
14 minutes while journey times are up to 13 minutes longer on weekdays
and 9 minutes longer on weekends.

As reported last month, the timetables reintroduce Sunday services on
703 between Bentleigh and Brighton for the first time in nearly 20
years. Meanwhile, 823 (Southland – North Brighton) gains a new return
trip after school plugging a previous hour-long gap. The 2337 Saturday
evening trip on 788 ex Frankston to Mornington (a remnant of the old
NightRider timetable) appears to be extended to Rosebud however there is
conflicting advice if this is actually the case. While total trip counts
are unchanged, there are consequences with new runtimes resulting in
longer gaps in peak times – the 828 has two consecutive 30 minute gaps
in the AM peak, on a route that otherwise runs an average headway of
every 20 minutes. This also affects hourly routes such as 811, 812 and
813.

Routes with timetable changes include:

<u>Dandenong Depot</u>

-   800 (Dandenong – Chadstone)\

-   811 (Dandenong – Brighton)\

-   812 (Dandenong – Brighton)\

-   813 (Dandenong – Waverley Gardens)\

-   828 (Berwick – Hampton)\

-   857 (Dandenong – Chelsea)\

-   885 (Glen Waverley – Springvale)

<u>Moorabbin Depot</u>

-   631 (Southland – Waverley Gardens)\

-   705 (Springvale – Mordialloc)\

-   708 (Hampton – Carrum)\

-   811 (Dandenong – Brighton)\

-   812 (Dandenong – Brighton)\

-   821 (Southland – Clayton)\

-   822 (Chadstone – Sandringham)\

-   823 (Southland – North Brighton)\

-   828 (Berwick – Hampton)

<u>Oakleigh Depot</u>

-   701 (Oakleigh – Bentleigh)\

-   703 (Blackburn – Middle Brighton)\

-   767 (Southland – Box Hill)

<u>Pakenham Depot</u>

-   835 (Berwick – Narre Warren Circle)\

-   836 (Berwick – Eden Rise Shopping Centre)\

-   841 (Cranbourne – Narre Warren North)\

-   846 (Berwick – Eden Rise Shopping Centre)\

-   926 (Fountain Gate – Pakenham)

<u>Rosebud Depot</u>

-   786 (Rye – St Andrews Beach)\

-   787 (Safety Beach – Rosebud – Rye – Sorrento)\

-   788 (Frankston - Portsea)

At the time of writing the online timetables on the PTV website were
littered with numerous issues: with trips and even entire directions
missing; timepoints absent; footnotes omitted; trips shown stopping
along incorrect variants; and a failure to show day restrictions (such
as Friday nights only).

### **Sunbury peak boost**

There are revised runtimes and additional; peak services in the
outer-north west fringe suburb of Sunbury on routes 481, 485 to 489 from
4 December. Additional trips operate during school pick up/drop off
times, eliminating two 80 minute gaps around 0830 and 1515. Sunbury Bus
Services’ 2010 network had introduced pulse school buses departing the
station, eliminating deviations past schools, but this effectively tied
up buses from performing route duty. It appears the route network will
transport some students into the station, with primary school deviations
again operating on 488 (Jacksons Hill) and buses on 485 passing Sunbury
Downs College at an appropriate time.

Frequencies on 485 (Wilsons Lane) & 486 (Rolling Meadows) are being
boosted for CBD commuters interchanging with trains, with services 15 to
20 minute headways instead of every half hour. Instances of counter-peak
trips running direct paths to/from outer termini have largely been
eliminated although they still feature on the 487 (Killara Heights) and
489 (Canterbury Hills) timetables early morning. An additional Saturday
morning trip has also been added on each town route, meeting the 0757
train to Melbourne. The 483 (Moonee Ponds) service will now operate to a
revised timetable but service levels are unchanged.

### **Consultation for proposed 343 to Hurstbridge**

During November PTV undertook community consultation regarding a new 343
service between Greensborough and Hurstbridge due to commence in the new
year. The service, funded in the 2016/2017 state budget as part of the
Hurstbridge line upgrade, is designed to supplement the rail service
which is nearing capacity at peak times due to the single track sections
beyond Greensborough. Initial suggestions were that the service would
only operate to Diamond Creek, but this has been revised, providing
service to a residential pocket near Wattle Glen.

Feedback was sought on two route options, one providing a direct route
along Diamond Creek Rd and the other operating via St Helena for
expanded residential coverage at the expense of competitive journey
times. It is proposed buses will operate at 20 minute intervals at peak
times and 40 to 60 minutes interpeak depending on the route taken. It
appears no weekend service will be provided. The route operates in
suburbs served by Transdev, Dysons and Panorama, along with myki school
runs operated by both Mees and Diamond Coaches, so it’ll be interesting
to see who gets the contact.

###  **Frankston bus stop circus**

As reported last month, works are underway for a \$13 million
redevelopment of Young St and the Frankston station bus interchange, due
for completion in May 2017. The alternative locations introduced from
Sunday 6 November (see below) are hardly user friendly with many stops
as far as a six minute (450m) walk from the station entrance – buses
continue to depart at the same time, so tight train connections are no
longer reliable – PTV’s brochure advises passengers to allow extra time
for connections, but this could consequently mean getting a train 30
minutes earlier in some cases! The dispersed locations require
passengers doing a bus-bus interchange to walk up 700m between
connections, such as travelling from Carrum Downs to Frankston Hospital.
Meanwhile, 771 to Langwarrin previously departed opposite the
Cranbourne-Frankston Rd services but with the buses now departing in
Beach St and Fletcher Rd respectively, passengers must walk eight or
nine minutes between stops if they find a long wait for the next bus at
the first stop.

Routes departing Beach St:

-   770 (Frankston – Karingal Hub)\

-   771 (Frankston – Langwarrin)\

-   773 (Frankston – Frankston South)\

-   776 (Frankston – Pearcedale)\

-   788 (Frankston – Portsea)\

-   832 (Frankston – Carrum Downs)\

-   833 (Frankston – Carrum Downs)\

-   887 (Rosebud – Monash Uni (Peninsula Campus))\

-   901 (Frankston – Melbourne Airport)

Routes departing Young St south of Wells St:

-   772 (Frankston – Eliza Heights)\

-   774 (Frankston – Delacombe Park)\

-   775 (Frankston – Lakewood)\

-   779 (Frankston – Belvedere)\

-   780 (Frankston – Carrum)\

-   781 (Frankston – Mt Martha)\

-   782 (Frankston – Balnarring – Flinders)\

-   783 (Frankston – Hastings)\

-   784 (Frankston – Osborne)\

-   785 (Frankston – Mornington East)

Routes departing Fletcher Road:

-   789 (Frankston – Langwarrin)\

-   790 (Frankston – Langwarrin)\

-   791 (Frankston – Cranbourne)

Signage elected to direct passengers for the changes was poor, although
rudimentary noticed sticky-taped to bus shelter windows appeared by
lunchtime on the first day. Thankfully PTV provided Hoban staff members
to direct lost passengers for several days, who handed out a DL brochure
on the changes, including a map. An alternative version of this map is
available on the Vicroads website but the PTV website only has a
text-based news item advising of stop changes (without specific stop
locations). With the exception of the Cranbourne Transit routes, PTV’s
GTFS data has not been updated to show the locations of the relocated
stops, which causes misleading results in journey planner results both
on their site, Google Transit and countless third party apps.

### **City2Sea detours**

Runners again affected Sunday morning commuters in the inner south, this
time on Sunday 20 November for City2Sea. Trandev Routes 216, 219 and 220
were detoured via City Road, Alexandra Avenue and Punt Road until 1300,
while 600 and 922 terminated at Acland St and Barkly St in St Kilda. CDC
Melbourne’s 606 services from Port Melbourne were once more truncated at
Park St, St Kida before 1400 – Elsternwick passengers were advised to
take a 3a or 16 tram to St Kilda Junction and swap to a 67 tram while
any Elwood passengers were left to find their own route.

### **World Cup of Golf shuttles**

This year’s World Cup of Golf was held at Kingston Heath Golf Course in
Heatherton, with CDC Melbourne providing spectator shuttle buses to/from
nearby Moorabbin Station, supplementing nearby local routes 631
(Southland – Waverley Gardens), 821 (Southland – Clayton) and 903
(Mordialloc – Altona). A 20 minute frequency operated on Wednesday 23
November for the Pro-Am day, while buses departed every 5 to 8 minutes
for Rounds 1 to 4 held from Thursday 24 November to Sunday 28 November.
Crowds were significantly down compared to the Australian Masters held
at Kingston Heath in 2009 when Tiger Woods won the tournament.

### **New bus punctuality measures**

Quietly announced in the 67^th^ edition of PTV’s quarterly *Track
Record* publication were significant changes to the ontime performance
measures for buses. Previously buses were considered ontime if they
arrived at termini no more than 5 minutes 59 seconds late, which in the
past had led to some operators adding significant padding to the last
section of trips - officially buses arriving more than 1 minute early
was not meant to be considered ontime, it is assumed this was largely
ignored in the manual data collection.

Effective 1 July the regime has been brought into line with metropolitan
trains and trams, with punctuality now measured as the proportion of
services departing timing points along the route no more than 59 seconds
early and no more than 4 minutes and 59 seconds late. The arrival at the
termini does not appear to be considered. This is a stricter measure
than used in Sydney with TfNSW only considering services not ontime if
they start their trip more than 1 minute before or 5 minutes after their
scheduled departure time, a somewhat lenient measure – eg the crosstown
400 could be over 20 minutes late into Bondi Junction and still be
considered ontime! Likewise Hillsbus M2 services in the PM peak can pass
suburban timepoints over 10 minutes early if traffic is flowing well
(thus getting commuters on-board home faster but potentially leaving
someone behind in Cherrybrook who wanted to go Thursday night shopping
at Castle Towers).

It should be noted that Melbourne trams currently are only tracked at 4
of 5 points along a route, however reports suggest the tram franchise
contract extension will see this become up to 20 points along a route.

Along with PTV’s stricter regime, the BusTracker GPS system is now
solely used to collect data. Until July 2015 the data was effectively
self-reported, with operators manually collecting a sub-set of just 5%
to 10% of trips, which had often raised the eyebrows of the Victorian
Auditor General. A transition phase using both methods had applied
during the 2015/2016 financial year.

The new ontime regime came into effect at the same time PTV began to
enforce punctuality and reliability penalties for Transdev services as
part of their contract that began in August 2013. As the 67^th^ issue of
the *Track Record* covers the April to June quarter there is no separate
reporting of Transdev’s services – it will be interesting to see this is
done in the next edition.

A comparison of the old and new measures is provided, which indicates a
difference of ten percentage points, effectively brining buses in line
with ontime running observed for trams. This comes on top of a loss of a
further 3 to 4 percentage points when they began incorporating the
BusTracker data.

2014/2015 statistics:\

(solely using the manual data collection method)

-   Jul – Sep 2014: 93.3%\

-   Oct – Dec 2014: 93.2%\

-   Jan – Mar 2015: 93.2%\

-   Apr – Jun 2015: 93.2%\

- Jul – Sep 2015: old 2015/2016 stats: (using a combination of manually
reported figures and BusTracker data. The old measure being up to 5 mins
59 seconds late at termini, with the new measure being up to 4 minutes
59 seconds late at timepoints along the route.)
89.8%, new 80%\

-   Oct – Dec 2015: old 90.8%, new 78.5%\

-   Jan – Mar 2016: old 89.6%, new 78.6%\

-   Apr – June 2016: new 79.4%

It is not clear if the manual reporting for reliability continues –
there are ongoing issues where depot staff fail to enter buses into the
tracking equipment and on occasion an entire depot might not be tracked!
The usual figure of more than 99.9% of services across the metropolitan
bus network operating was again listed.

### **PTV website refresh survey**
PTV are currently conducting a survey regarding the functionality of the
PTV website. One would suspect a refreshed website will be delivered in
the new year coinciding with the launch of the new Transport for
Victoria (TFV) authority.

## **Western Australia**

**TransPerth**: From Sunday 4 December the following changes occurred:

-   Routes 30, 31 and 34 extend to Perth Busport and have time changes\

-   Route 32 has time changes, and a number of deviations to Hurlingham
    Road are removed due to poor patronage\

-   Routes 33, 35, 70, 72, 75, 285, 288, 298 have time changes\

-   Routes 36, 39, 40, 286, 287, 293, 295, 296, 299, 380 and 935 have a
    minor route change in Victoria Park. These services no longer
    service Stop 14509 (Craig St after Burswood Road) and Stop 14451
    (Great Eastern Highway before Burswood Road). New stops are
    located on Burswood Road\

-   Routes 286, 287 and 293 have time changes\

-   Route 345 no longer extends to Whiteman Park due to poor patronage.
    The trips still operate but terminate on Bennett Springs Drive.
    Passengers travelling to Whiteman Park can catch routes 955 and
    956 on Lord St. An accessible bus operated by Whiteman Park will
    travel on Whiteman Park Road from Lord St to the village centre\

-   Route 471 has time changes and a route change to serve the Burns
    Beach Estate. Route 471 now runs via Grand Ocean Ent, Whitehaven
    Avenue and Ocean Parade, to terminate at the Burns Beach Sunset
    Village\

-   Routes 473 and 474 have a minor route change in Kinross, with both
    routes no longer running along Geoff Russell Avenue. Instead they
    run via Kinross Drive, reinstating regular bus services between
    Edinburgh Avenue and Connolly Drive\

-   Route 473 has one additional early morning weekday trip from Kinross
    to Joondalup station.

**TransGoldfields** is continuing its services to and from Kalgoorlie
and Coolgardie (route 865, Thursday) and Kambalda (route 866, Saturday)
for a further 12 months from Sunday 13 November. The viability of these
services will be reviewed every 12 months.

## **Thanks**
to Jason Blackman, Ian Cooper, Hilaire Fraser, Craig Halsall,
Geoff Hassall, Michael Kane, Bradley Matthews, Peter Parker, Richard
Peck, Lourie Smit, David Whiteford and various contributors on
*Australian Transport Discussion Board* for Bus news.

# **FERRY NEWS**

## **NSW**

**Manly** Ferry service timetable competition. Sydney Ferries, who run
the “big slow boats” to from Manly to Circular Quay suffer both a feast
and a famine on their services. The feast arises from their promotion of
a cheap Sunday Excursion \$2.50 Family Fare. Whatever the price
elasticity for ferry services might be, this practice completely
overwhelms it. As a consequence the half-hourly service is fully laden
(1100 passengers most of the day on Sunday) This looks good on the
traffic statistics returns, but is totally terrible at the cash
register. Why charge at all?

One the other hand - the famine. Competition from Manly Fast Ferries
(whose cash prices match Sydney Ferries’ prices in rush hour) has taken
away at least 80% of the commuter traffic (Example: patronage on the
0700 service out of Manly has fallen from 400 to 50). The Fast Ferry IS
fast; it runs a 250 seat service every ten minutes; it charges no more,
has better ambience, all-round water-level views— and it has a bar. The
Fast Ferry also has its equivalent of the Opal card at a discount. What
more could a commuter want? Two other ferry operators also compete, as
does Sydney Buses which can get commuters to the city for one-third the
price of the ferries.

## **Tasmania**

**MerseyLink**, operators of the Trans–Mersey “Spirit of Devonport”
ferry were expected to resume operation on 15 November after completion
of reconstruction of the western shore pontoon wharf. The June 2016
floods, which impacted heavily on North Western Tasmania, seriously
damaged the pontoon. At the height of the floods all shipping activity
on the Mersey River, including both “Spirits of Tasmania”, and two
roll-on roll off cargo ferries was suspended because of the enormous
volume of timber, logs and debris being carried by the river to Bass
Strait.

A year-round ferry service between Triabunna and **Maria Island** will
start in March operated by the Navigators Group with three sailings a
day each way during the peak period and regular sailings during the
off-peak period. The contract is for five years. Navigators Group, owned
and operated by the Roche family, runs a number of ferry and cruise
services on the River Derwent and around the Tasman Peninsula.

## **Victoria**

### **Portarlington ferry continues for another three years **

The trial of a private ferry between Portarlington and Melbourne
Docklands will continue for a further three years, after an announcement
made by Port Phillip Ferries owner Paul Little along with local MP and
Minister of Water, Lisa Neville on 21 November, with final details of
the agreement still being negotiated. Services resumed the following day
with a day of free travel.

The introduction of the service comes as the state government constructs
a \$15 million safe harbour at Portarlington, which had caused some
service disruptions at the start of the trial. The safe harbour is
needed to avoid choppy conditions causing service cancellations during
strong winds, which also prevented sailings on some days.

A daily trial service had operated from 11 August until the vessel was
taken off the service for scheduled maintenance works from 14 October.
The return fare has increased from \$25 to \$27 although a cheaper \$12
single fare applies with a 10-trip ticket.

Local residents were said to be overjoyed at the announcement after a
decade of lobbying for a service. The peak hour 100km drive to Melbourne
can take more than two hours, meaning the ferry provides a competitive
option despite the limited timetable, with the ferry currently
timetabled at 90 minutes. With the announcement that the service will
continue for three years, Paul Little will continue to work with Parks
Victoria to lift the speed limit on the Yarra, which could cut to
journey time to as little as 75 minutes each way. With the announcement,
Little repeated his hope that he’ll find viable routes from other Port
Phillip towns once the Portarlington route is established.

While the town of Portarlington has only about 3,500 residents, the
service will attract commuters from nearby towns such as Drysdale, Ocean
Grove and Queenscliff. The Bellarine Peninsula is also a tourist hotspot
over the summer period, which will further strengthen the route.

The revised timetable has maintained the previous weekday 0700 departure
and 1730 return for CBD commuters. (McHarry’s 60 bus provides
alternative options home should one miss the return voyage, with the
last connection meeting the 2015 train from Melbourne.)

Bellarine residents may enjoy a mid-week daytrip to Melbourne departing
at 1145 Mondays or 1115 Wednesday and Friday while Melbournians can
enjoy a weekday outing on the Bellarine Peninsula with a 0930 or 1000
service depending on the day. On Tuesday and Thursday then can return to
Melbourne at 1530, or catch the daily 1915 sailing after an early
dinner. On weekends and public holidays the ferry departs Portarlington
at 0900, 1600 and 1930 and Docklands at 0715, 1045 and 1715 catering for
various daytrip options in either direction.

The Wyndham Harbour service, which was previously been scaled back to
weekends only from 10 August before being suspended in October, has sunk
due to poor patronage.

## **Thanks**
to Tony Bailey, Ian Cooper, Craig Halsall, Geoff Lambert and
Oscar Verlander for Ferry news.

# **AIR NEWS**

## **Domestic**

**Skippers Aviation’s** contract for air services to Laverton, Leonora
and Wiluna (operating since 2011) has been extended to November 2017.
The WA Department of Transport is preparing recommended options for long
term decisions regarding the northern air routes for next year. These
will be provided to whatever Government is in power after the state
elections expected in March. Skippers uses different sized aircraft with
seating for 50, 36, 30 or 19 thus allowing flexibility for their routes.

## **International**

**Singapore Airlines** is delaying the start of its
Sydney-Jakarta-Singapore service, which was due to commence on 23
November, because of repairs to Jakarta Airport runways.

By January 2017 **China Eastern Airlines** will launch direct services
from Sydney to Kunming and Hangzhou in November 2016. Its Melbourne to
Shanghai service will increase to double daily flights from November
2016 to February 2017. December 2016 will see the introduction of
Brisbane to Shanghai flights, four times weekly, with an increase to
daily flights between January and February 2017. The Sydney to Shanghai
service will increase to double daily flights from mid-December to
February 2017. Sydney to Beijing services (codeshared with Qantas) will
commence in January 2017, along with the launch of a new Sydney to Wuhan
route the same month. Thus by January 2017 it will have flights from
Sydney to Shanghai, Hangzhou, Beijing, Kunming, Nanjing and Wuhan,
operating 58 flights weekly between the two countries.

## **Thanks**
to Tony Bailey, David Whiteford and the *Australian* for Air
news.

# **About *Table Talk***

***Table Talk*** is published monthly by the Australian Timetable
Association Inc. (Registration No. A0043673H) as a journal of record
covering recent timetable news items. The ATA also publishes the
***Times*** covering timetable history and analysis. Contributions are
invited and are very welcome. Please send these to the appropriate
Editor. ABN 74248483468.

The **deadline** **for *Table Talk*** is the second last weekend of the
month, but contributions are welcome at all times.

**Editor, Rail and Tram, Air, Ferry:** Victor Isaacs,
[***abvi@iinet.net.au***](mailto:tabletalk@austta.org.au), 11 Blacket St Downer ACT 2602.

**Editor,** **Bus**: As an interim arrangement, please send your Bus
news to [***abvi@iinet.net.au***](mailto:tabletalk@austta.org.au)

**Production and Mailout**: Geoff and Judy Lambert.

**Proofreaders:** Agnes Boskovitz, David Cranney and Geoff Hassall.

Original material appearing in ***Table Talk*** may be reproduced in
other publications but acknowledgement is required.

**Membership of the Australian Timetable Association** includes monthly
copies of the *Times*, *Table Talk*, the Distribution List of
timetables, and the monthly Auction catalogues. The membership fee is
\$60 (Adult) and \$36 (Junior) pa. Membership enquiries should be
directed to the Membership Officer, Len Regan, at
[***ata.treasurer@austta.org.au***](mailto:treasurer@austta.org.au)

Back issues of ***Table Talk*** are available on the Australian
Timetable Association’s website, ***austta.org.au,*** after two months.

**Table Talk Newswire** is an advance monthly email of Rail news. To
obtain this, ask the Rail Editor at
[***abvi@iinet.net.au***](mailto:abvi@iinet.net.au)
