---
layout: page
title: Table Talk - February 2017
author: Australian Timetable Association
subject: Transportation
---

<div style=" font-family: TimesNewRoman, 'Times New Roman', Times, Baskerville, Georgia, serif;
            font-style: italic;
            font-weight: bold;
            font-size: 36pt;
            text-transform: uppercase;
            color: black;">TABLE TALK</div>

**AUSTRALASIAN TIMETABLE NEWS**

**No. 294, February 2017 ISSN 1038-3697, RRP \$4.95**

**Published by the Australian Timetable Association**

[**www.austta.org.au**](https://www.timetable.org.au)

# **RAIL AND TRAM NEWS**

## **QR CityTrain timetable disarray**

The Acting CEO of Queensland Rail provided a report to the Queensland
Minister of Transport on 3 January about the failure of CityTrain to
provide an adequate service on Christmas Day, with the cancellation of
235 of the scheduled 730 services, plus the failure to provide adequate
notice of the cancellations. The report found the failure occurred
because of:

-   Constrained driver availability due to Christmas Day falling on the
    last Sunday of the year, meaning that many drivers had no Sunday
    availability left under the Enterprise Agreement;
-   Higher than anticipated leisure day unavailability;
-   Timing of notification of unplanned absences; and
-   Limited rostering system flexibility to respond.

The Acting CEO said the main lessons were:

-   To improve timeliness of notification to customers
-   Earlier publication of public holiday and major event rosters;
-   More timely communication with train crew about availability.

And, of most interest to readers of this magazine:

-   That patronage on Christmas Day is generally about 60% lower than
    for a normal Sunday. Hence a review will be undertaken of data for
    the past five years with a view to assessing whether QR should
    reduce Christmas Day services from the usual Sunday/Public Holiday
    half hourly frequency to hourly.

Meanwhile, emails released under Freedom of Information legislation
reveal that TransLink apparently considered QR was so unprepared for the
extra services for the new Redcliffe line’s opening in October that
there was no way the timetable could be achieved. TransLink’s passenger
transport services general manager Simon Cook wrote to a colleague that
QR “never had a chance of resourcing” adequately ahead of its 3 October
timetable. It would have needed about 100 extra drivers “on top of the
old timetable” to make it work. As early as February TransLink was
querying QR plans to hire extra drivers.

On 23 January, the QR timetable changed again to reflect the end of the
school holidays and increased patronage. These timetables are online at
<https://translink.com.au/service-updates/112836>

However, a QR spokeswoman confirmed the new timetable was in fact, a
reversion to the 7 November timetable. It will remain for the remainder
of 2017. QR Acting CEO Mr Scales said the 7 November timetable delivered
certainty for commuters, with an average of 94% of trains running on
time. He said the 2017 timetable would also allow QR to focus on
teaching new driver recruits. The 7 November timetable featured 333
fewer services on weekdays compared with the 4 October timetable. It
will deliver 7883 services each week. Transport Minister Stirling
Hinchliffe told ABC Radio this week he was “seeing gradual improvements
but this isn’t an easy thing to turn around.”

The *Courier-Mail*’s analysis of the 23 January timetable claims that it
has “wound the clock back seven years on the number of services in some
of the southeast’s growth corridors.” The analysis centres on 12
stations identified by public transport advocates as problem zones.
Worst is Toombul, where train services are lower than 2010, with 159
daily weekday services compared with 170 then. That is just 23 extra
services a day on 1981 levels; two years after electrification of the
network. One of the State Government’s own backbenchers, Member for
Nudgee Leanne Linard, last week weighed in by launching a petition
calling on QR to fix the inner-north mess.

Train services stopping at Redbank in the fast-growing Ipswich region
have also shrunk below 2010 service levels, dropping from 108 daily
weekday services then to 95 services a day. That is just one extra
service on QR’s 1998 train timetable in force almost two decades ago.

Ferny Grove station was the only station to show a major improvement,
with 48 more services under the 2017 timetable compared to 2009. But
Rail Back on Track advocate Robert Dow said overcrowding was still a
problem.

***Weekday services per day (Monday-Thursday):***\
**Sandgate:**\
1998: 78\
2001: 78\
2009: 78\
2017: 106\
**Toombul:**\
1998: 92\
2001: 89\
2009: 170\
2017: 159\
**Strathpine:**\
1998: 91\
2001: 94\
2010: 101\
2017: 101\
**Burpengary:**\
1998: 83\
2001: 83\
2010: 90\
2017: 100\
**Kuraby:**\
1998: 89\
2001: 82\
2009: 93\
2017: 97\
**Lota:**\
1998: 85\
2001: 85\
2009: 93\
2017: 100\
**Doomben:**\
1998: unavailable\
2001: 41\
2009: 53\
2017: 59\
**Ferny Grove:**\
1998: 80\
2001: 81\
2009: 94\
2017: 142\
**Helensvale:**\
1998: unavailable\
2001: 60\
2010: 76\
2017: 92\
**Redbank:**\
1998: 94\
2001: 97\
2010: 108\
2017: 95\
**Richlands: (opened 2011)**\
2011: 86\
2017: 90\
**Landsborough:**\
1998: unavailable\
2001: 49\
2010: 52\
2017: 54

## **QR CityTrain projects**

The Queensland Infrastructure Plan was released on 16 January. The
Beerburrum-to-Nambour rail duplication is listed as ready for
consideration in the state budget, at an estimated cost of \$780
million. The project will be needed in just six years with the line
expected to reach capacity by 2023. The recommendation is likely to mean
the project will attract funding in this year’s budget. But the state
may need funding help from the Commonwealth to build the project. The
duplication of the line has been on the agenda of successive
governments.

Brisbane Cross River Rail is described as “having progressed out of the
pipeline” because it has already received a funding commitment, and it
will instead form part of the State Infrastructure Plan. The state
government has so far committed \$850 million to the \$5.4 billion
project, with the Commonwealth agreeing to provide \$10 million.

## **ARTC timetable amendments**

The following amendments to freight schedules have been made to ARTC’s
WTT of 22 January (ARTC TAA 0170-2017 refers):

**6BM7** Fridays runs as tabled to arrive Culcairn North 2253 depart
2344 (Sat), pass Albury 0020, Seymour Loop 0241, arrive Kilmore East
0310, depart 0337, thence as tabled.

**7SM5** Saturdays runs as tabled to arrive Culcairn North 0845 (Sun)
depart 0857, arrive Ettamogah 0935, depart 1005, pass Albury 1014,
Seymour Loop 1258, arrive Tallarook 1310, depart 1323, pass Somerton
Loop 1416, Tottenham 1437, arrive Melbourne Operations Terminal 1500
terminate.

**7WM2** Saturdays runs as tabled to arrive Junee 1017, depart 1042,
arrive Culcairn North 1212, depart 1248, thence as tabled.

**1MW2** Sundays departs Canal Siding 0200, pass Tottenham 0217,
Somerton Loop 0238, arrive Kilmore East 0311, depart 0316, pass Seymour
Loop 0343, arrive Albury 0627, depart 0715, arrive Ettamogah 0728,
depart 0813, pass Henty 0902, Wagga Wagga 0951, Bomen South 0958, arrive
Junee 1029, depart 1034, pass Cootamundra 1132, Wallendbeen 1156, Harden
1216, Joppa Junction 1445, Goulburn 1450, Medway Junction 1518, Wingello
1530, Exeter 1549, arrive Moss Vale 1559, depart 1607, pass Picton 1659,
Macarthur South Junction 1721, Glenfield Loop 1738, Leightonfield (ARTC)
1750, arrive SOY 1800, depart 1850, pass Marrickville Junction 1916,
thence as tabled by TfNSW.

**6NY3** Fridays runs as tabled to arrive Yarrabandai 0219, depart 0255
(Sat), pass Ivanhoe 0707, arrive Broken Hill 1136, depart 1815, thence
as tabled.

**6AB6** Fridays runs as tabled to arrive Broken Hill 0425, depart 0630
(Sat), pass Kinalung 0712, arrive Kaleentha 0829, depart 0910, pass
Darnick 0948, arrive Ivanhoe 1026, depart 1106, arrive Trida 1149,
depart 1247, pass Roto 1314, Matakana 1339, Euabalong West 1406,
Kiacatoo 1430, Condobolin 1449, Yarrabandai 1518, arrive Goobang
Junction 1559, depart 1730, thence as tabled.

## **High Speed Rail**

***by Sarah Martin,* Weekend Australian*, 14 January***

Malcolm Turnbull will be asked to consider giving the green light to
developers who want to forge ahead with a project for high-speed rail on
Australia’s east coast. Consolidated Land and Rail Australia, an
Australian-based consortium that has already secured almost 20,000ha for
new development sites along the rail corridor, will present an
unsolicited bid to the Prime Minister within the first half of this
year.

CLARA wants the first stage of the rail development to run from
Melbourne to Shepparton, with a new regional city site near the line to
underpin the financial viability of the project. Its 30-year plan would
be followed by links between Sydney and Goulburn and Goulburn and
Canberra before being finally linked to the Shepparton-Melbourne line by
the 2040s. Using Japanese Maglev technology, rail travel time between
Sydney and Melbourne would be just under two hours.

Nick Cleary, chairman of CLARA, said the company was preparing a
“detailed bid” for government and said the one ingredient required for
it to progress plans for an environmental impact statement was
“political will”. “We have had great discussions with government at all
levels — they all have showed initial interest in the project but have
all requested a more detailed proposal,” Mr Cleary said. “We are very
excited to now be at a point to deliver this required information within
the first half of 2017. This is the Sydney Harbour Bridge, the Snowy
Hydro Scheme, of this generation. This is the time to show we can still
do nation-building projects. The engagement with the private sector will
demonstrate the government’s role as an ­enabler for large scale
projects.”

Mr Cleary said the CLARA plan did not just have a single focus but would
“solve many problems and provide a tremendous boost to the nation in all
ways”. CLARA has signed up Hitachi Consulting Australia as lead
consultants to prepare the bid for government. “We are the only company
that has the land under our legal control to be able to implement this
nation-building project, and solve so many of the states’ and national
issues — including congestion, housing affordability, overcrowding, and
how to house the additional 14 million people by 2050,” Mr Cleary said.
“And in solving these we are also able to deliver the long-awaited,
often-sought, achievable high speed rail at no cost to ­government.”

While Mr Turnbull has previously expressed support for the \$200 billion
proposal, Urban Infrastructure Minister Paul Fletcher is understood to
be highly sceptical of the plan. However, after a recent visit to China
and South Korea, Industry Minister Greg Hunt said that cabinet wanted to
advance the project, saying “now is the time” for Australia to develop
high speed rail on Australia’s east coast.

Even if the federal government rebuffs its call for support, CLARA is
expected to continue to negotiate with the Victorian and NSW governments
and at council level. John Alexander, chairman of a parliamentary
committee examining better transport connectivity, has argued that there
exists a “perfect storm” of opportunity for the project to be
financially viable.

*Also see Recommended Reading below.*

![*The map published by CLARA’s appears to show Canberra served by a
branch line, and Wagga Wagga and Albury served by some sort of undefined
connection. The eight proposed new cities are marked.*](ttalk20170201.svg){width="4.692025371828522in"
height="3.84375in"}

## **Sydney Metro**

Construction will start this year on Sydney Metro tunnels under Sydney
Harbour and the CBD. NSW Ministers for Planning, Rob Stokes, and
Transport, Andrew Constance, announced on 10 January the approval of the
Chatswood to Sydenham section of the project. Mr Constance said, “The
scale of this project will rival any megaproject across the globe, and
today marks the start of even more grunt work. This is an unprecedented
boost to rail capacity for our great city.”

Construction sites will be established in the Sydney CBD this year. By
the end of 2018, the first of five tunnel boring machines will be
carving out new twin tunnels. Two consortia are competing to build the
new twin tunnels, with the contract expected to be awarded around the
middle of 2017. Planning approval includes:

-   16.5km of new metro rail between Chatswood and Sydenham, including
    15.5km of new twin railway tunnels under Sydney Harbour and the
    Sydney CBD;
-   Seven new metro railway stations at Crows Nest, Victoria Cross
    (North Sydney), Barangaroo, Martin Place, Pitt St, Central (new
    underground platforms), and Waterloo.

The planning process for conversion of the Bankstown line to Metro
standards will start this year.

## **NSW Train Link: Significant incidents**

On 17 and 18 January, due to bush fires between Tarago and Bungendore,
the railway was closed and trains replaced by buses between Goulburn and
Canberra and v.v.

On 24 January the 0455 Brisbane to Sydney XPT was replaced by a bus for
the entire journey due to a points failure at Acacia Ridge, south of
Brisbane. A delay of more than 180 minutes for buses departing Brisbane
was expected. Replacement buses also operated from Casino, where delays
of up to 30 minutes were expected. Although NSW Train Link cited the
reason of “points failure”, another factor must have been Queensland
Rail’s prohibition of this train departing Brisbane any later than 0600.
After that time, its southbound passage would disrupt northbound express
trains from the Gold Coast. On the following day, the 0455 XPT from
Brisbane was replaced by a bus as far as Casino.

## **Sydney Trains WTT 21 January 2017**

Version 6.01 of Sydney Trains Working Timetable has been issued dated 21
January 2017.

## **Victorian rail projects assessment**

Infrastructure Australia has positively assessed business cases for both
the Melbourne Metro Tunnel project, and the Murray Basin rail network
upgrade. The January release of IA’s latest Infrastructure Priority List
has added the Metro Tunnel as a High Priority Project, the highest level
of assessment. The cross-CBD rail tunnel project joins the Western
Sydney Airport and M4 and WestConnex motorway projects in NSW, the M80
Ring Road upgrade in Victoria, the Ipswich Motorway Rocklea-Darra Stage
1c project in Queensland, and the Perth Freight Link in Western
Australia on the High Priority Projects list.

“The Australian Infrastructure Plan is very clear on the need for
investment in high-capacity, high-frequency public transport services to
support projected population growth in our major cities,” IA chief
executive Philip Davies said. “Rail services into and around central
Melbourne are already reaching capacity in peak periods, and in some
cases passengers are unable to board trains. The number of people
travelling by rail into the Melbourne CBD during the morning peak is
forecast to grow by 65% between 2015 and 2031, with patronage on lines
servicing growth corridors in the city’s north, west and south-east
growing most quickly. The proposed Melbourne Metro would address network
capacity constraints by enabling 20,000 more passengers to use
Melbourne’s rail network during each peak hour.”

Meanwhile, the ongoing upgrade of the Murray Basin rail network was
added to the Infrastructure Priority List as a Priority Project, the
second-highest level of assessment.

“Capacity on the Murray Basin rail network is constrained by the mixture
of broad and standard gauge lines and a 19-tonne axle load limit, which
means trains cannot operate at full capacity,” Davies explained. “The
Murray Basin Rail Project has been identified as a Priority Project as
it addresses the fragmentation of the regional rail network and will
alleviate current capacity constraints. This will ultimately reduce rail
freight costs to businesses and improve the competitiveness of Murray
Basin exports.”

## **Melbourne Metro Tunnel**

Franklin St and A’Beckett St in Melbourne’s CBD were closed on 16
January for construction to begin on the \$10.9 billion Metro Tunnel.
Acting Transport Minister Jaala Pulford said they will not re-open “for
many years,” and that “This is the start of major disruption for this
massive project, which will bring decades of benefits for Melbourne. I
thank people for their patience. I know these closures will be
disruptive but they will enable us to build the turn-up-and-go train
system we need to stay the most liveable city in the world.”

Construction crews will use the newly-closed roads to dig 11 storeys
below ground level to build the new CBD North station below Swanston St.
Work is also underway on St Kilda Road at what will be Domain station,
with a section of Domain Road to close later this year as construction
ramps up.

## **V/Line: Opening of Caroline Springs**

On Saturday 28 January a VLocity DMU set was timetabled to run from
Melbourne to the new station at Caroline Springs, 19.6 km from Southern
Cross between Deer Park and Rockbank. The train was open for inspection
in platform 1 from 0900 until 1400 during a Community Day. Caroline
Springs station opened for traffic with V/Line’s new timetable of 29
January.

## **V/Line: 29 January timetable**

With the introduction of the V/Line timetable of 29 January the
following train describer numbering were introduced:\
8000-8099 Northern Region services operating on the Bendigo line and
associated branches.\
8100-8249 Western Region services operating on the Ballarat line and
associated branches.\
8250-8299 South Western Region services operating on the Geelong line
via Werribee.\
8300-8399 North Eastern Region Broad Gauge services operating on the
Seymour line and associated branches.\
8400-8499 Eastern Region services operating on the Traralgon /
Bairnsdale line.\
8500-8599 Central Region services operating on the Metro Trains Network.\
8600-8649 North Eastern and Central Region Standard Gauge Services.\
8650-8699 Not utilised, reserved for future use.\
8700-8899 South Western Region services operating on the Geelong /
Warrnambool line via Wyndham Vale.\
8900-8999 Central Region services operating on the V/Line Network.

Off-peak fares will apply to:

-   The new 1713 weekday train Melbourne to Warrnambool,
-   The 0515 Shepparton to Melbourne train (due 0759), and
-   The new 1631 train Melbourne to Shepparton.

## **V/Line in the heat**

V/Line has eased speed restrictions on its freight network in north-west
Victoria. From 9 January, freight trains which were unable to run
between Dunolly and Birchip (Mildura line), and Echuca and Deniliquin
between midday and 2000 or 2200 when temperatures reach 33 degrees, can
now operate at 30 kms per hour. The change follows site inspections and
track works. Works and inspections are also progressing between Tocumwal
and Shepparton to upgrade the line to enable an easing of heat speed
restrictions. In normal conditions, trains on the V/Line freight network
run at a maximum of 80km/h, with some sections restricted to 50km/h.

## **Metro Trains Melbourne: Station closedowns**

As part of the **Dandenong line** Sky Rail project, **Carnegie** station
is closed for seven weeks from Monday 23 January. Replacement buses are
running.

***Ross Morrison*** *analyses the replacement bus timetable:* Given the
opposition (rightly or wrongly) to the project, you would think the
replacement bus service would be fast and frequent – similar to what was
provided between Caulfield and Moorabbin last year. Some of the
“highlights” of the timetable (from Carnegie to Caulfield) I’ve found
include:

In the morning peak between 0700 and 0900, 11 replacement services are
operating. In the same two-hour period, 27 trains stop at Murrumbeena.
Fair enough you can’t run that many buses, but you would think there
would be some consistency in the timetable, but no, the buses are
operating anywhere between eight and 13 minute intervals. Between the
morning and evening peaks, Dandenong line trains operate every 10
minutes. However, before 1530, again the buses are operating at
intervals of anywhere between eight and 15 minutes. Then from 1530 until
after 2000, the buses are operating every 10 minutes. Which begs the
question, if it is possible to run every 10 minutes at this time of the
day, why can’t a similar standard frequency be provided in the morning
peak and before 1530?

On Saturdays/Sundays the replacement buses operate every 20 minutes –
even when the train frequency is 10 minutes from 1000 until 1900(ish).
Some of the connections at Murrumbeena and Caulfield defy description.
For example, on the weekends, if you catch Dandenong line trains
arriving at Caulfield at 1538 and 1548, the replacement bus doesn’t
depart until 1556 – two minutes before the next Dandenong line train
arrives!

Finally, the replacement buses are scheduled to take 14 minutes to
travel from Carnegie to Caulfield. The route 900 buses from Carnegie to
Caulfield are timetabled for a six minute journey from the same bus stop
in Carnegie!

The substitute timetables are on the PTV and Metro Trains websites. The
Metro Trains website is better to see the train/bus connecting”
services.

Buses replaced trains between **Box Hill/Blackburn and Ringwood** from
27 December 2016 until 5 February 2017. Journey times increased by up to
40 minutes.

***Albert Isaacs*** *recounts his experiences:* The fact that rail
services would be replaced by buses Box Hill-Ringwood from 27 December
to 29 January on account of level crossing removal and major alterations
to stations at both Blackburn and Heatherdale, had been surprisingly
well publicised for some months prior to the changes. However, the fact
that these replacement buses were extended to run until 5 February did
not get much publicity!

Further, major changes to arrangements from 11 January 2017 also
received very little promotion. Prior to 11 January, as is usually the
case with bus replacements, there was a mix of express and stopping
buses Box Hill-Ringwood. However, the street layout at Laburnum is such
that it would be difficult for buses to come from the Maroondah Highway,
visit the station, and then do a loop to return to the highway.
Therefore, the Laburnum bus stop was sighted on the highway, about 150 m
from the station and, presumably, this encouraged a number of
complaints. By 11 January, work on the level crossing at Blackburn Road
were such that City trains could terminate/depart from Blackburn station
but not travel on the Down side of the station. Therefore, the
alternative arrangements from that date were that express buses to
Ringwood would continue to operate to/from Box Hill but most trains (but
not quite all) that had previously terminated/departed from Box Hill now
continued to/from Blackburn where they connected to/from buses stopping
at Nunawading, Mitcham, Heatherdale and Ringwood.

There was some information about these changes online, but not much
other promotion of the modifications to arrangements. Even Metro Trains’
advertisements in the daily papers were incorrect. The VDUs at stations
on the Up side of Box Hill were erratic, sometimes showing trains
terminating at Box Hill, and at other times correctly showing them as
Blackburn services. Nevertheless, there were a half-a-dozen or so Metro
Trains’ officers on the platform at Box Hill advising people for
stations Laburnum to Heatherdale to stay on the train, whilst those for
Ringwood or beyond were directed to change to express buses at Box Hill.
(Between Box Hill and Ringwood it was a direct bus trip straight along
the Maroondah Highway.)

Bus stop sites at both Box Hill and Blackburn also created problems.
Although there is a large bus station right above the Box Hill train
station, it is fully used by regular services, with no room for any
sporadic services. Therefore there was again a walk of about 100 m to
the rail replacement bus stops on the Maroondah Highway (ironically
right opposite the route 109 tram terminus). The bus stops at Blackburn
were in Railway Road on the north side of the station but, because of
continuing work on Blackburn, all trains arrived and departed from the
island platform on the south side. This meant that people going from
train to bus and vice versa had to take a longish walk along temporary
paths across the works area and with rickety wooden bases.

I was heard to say: “Let’s hope all this aggravation is worth it in the
long run, or is this yet another case of rail commuters being
inconvenienced for the sake of motorists?”

At **Alphington** (Hurstbridge line), the level crossing will be removed
by lowering the Hurstbridge line to run under Grange Road, safely
separating trains from traffic. The project is part of the
transformation of the Hurstbridge line, which will remove the Lower
Plenty Road level crossing, rebuild Rosanna station and duplicate the
line from Heidelberg to Rosanna.

**Bayswater** station (Belgrave line) was re-opened on 12 December 2016,
following a 37 day construction period. By 22 December 2016 the Mountain
Highway crossing had been removed and the road reopened.

Near **Mernda Park** station (Cranbourne line), a road overbridge will
replace the Thompsons Road level crossing and new paths and improved
lighting for pedestrians and cyclists will be constructed.

## **Yarra Trams: CBD closedown**

The criminal/security incident that occurred in Melbourne CBD on the
afternoon of Friday 20 January caused the suspension of tram services on
most major City centre routes. Swanston, Elizabeth, William, Flinders,
Collins and Bourke Streets were closed. A limited service operated along
Latrobe St.

*Also see Victorian bus news below.*

## **A new way to Bunbury?**

The WA National Party want to use funds from their proposed state mining
tax to resurrect a long-touted plan to extend the suburban electrified
Mandurah line 100 kms to Bunbury. The project has been previously
estimated by the party to cost \$1 billion. Nationals leader Brendon
Grylls said he wanted to bring better public transport to the bush, and
he would use [his mooted controversial increase to the mining rental
lease
fee](http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-08-09/brendon-grylls-mining-tax-causes-wa-national-liberal-tension/7711596)
to fund the plan. The proposal [was first mooted in 2008 by the then
Labor
government](http://www.abc.net.au/news/2008-02-06/fast-train-mooted-for-bunbury/1034364),
which commissioned a feasibility study into laying 140 kms of track down
Kwinana Freeway and Forrest Highway. However, transport officials poured
cold water on the idea in 2015, [saying progress on the rail link "was
not going
anywhere"](http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-06-29/bunbury-perth-fast-train-link-low-priority/6581912).

## **KiwiRail reopening**

Following the November earthquake centred on Kaikoura, the South Island
Main Trunk line was re-opened for freight trains between Blenheim and
the salt works at Lake Grassmere on 16 January. Repair work continues on
the remainder of the line.

## **Belgian timetable book**

The NMBS/SNCB, Belgian Railways, timetable book was not published for
the 2017 European timetable year. It used to be a very well-produced
volume, fully in both languages of the country, Dutch and French
(partially in German and English).

**Thanks** to Tony Bailey, Fahrplancenter, Albert Isaacs, Victor Isaacs,
Geoff Lambert, Ross Morrison, Len Regan,
*[www.railexpress.com.au](http://www.railexpress.com.au),
[www.railpage.com.au](http://www.railpage.com.au), Transit Australia*
and the *Courier-Mail* for Rail news.

# **BUS NEWS**

## **New Zealand**

**Dunedin Buses**, operated by Otago Regional Council, did not operate
on Christmas Day. However, a limited bus service did operate. It was
provided by the Dunedin Heritage Bus Association. Members drove their
restored buses. Fares were not charged but donations accepted. A similar
service is provided at Easter.

## **South Australia**

Due to low patronage numbers, the T2TX express services between Arndale
Centre Interchange and the City were cancelled from 29 January and the
Arndale Centre Park 'n' Ride removed The T2T was introduced as a trial
in July 2016.

## **Victoria**

**SkyBus,** operators of Melbourne’s express CBD to Tullamarine Airport
service, will also run an Avalon Express service meeting all flights
from 1 February. This seems to indicate that Skybus is replacing the
Sita service.

### **Earlier bedtimes in Ballarat**

As reported in January’s *Table Talk*, a new network was implemented in
Ballarat on 29 January. Further investigation has highlighted a
significant reduction of overall span in comparison to the proceeding
timetables, although some routes do enjoy some later trips or little
change on some days. Below are some examples. The removal of Friday
night services on trunk routes is a particular loss, as it will limit
options to enjoy late night shopping, after work drinks, dinners out,
school fetes etc.

<u>Route 1 to Wendouree replaced by Route 11</u>

-   Last Mon – Thurs bus now 1908, was 2043
-   Last Fri bus now 1908, was 2105
-   Last Saturday bus now 1729, was 1920
-   Last Sunday bus now 1710, was 1745

<u>Route 2 to Wendouree replaced by Route 12</u>

-   Last Mon – Thurs bus now 1949, was 1908
-   Last Fri bus now 1949, was 2115
-   Last Saturday bus now 1933, was 1815
-   Last Sunday bus now 1604, was 1645

<u>Route 4 to Invermay replaced by Route 13</u>

-   Last Mon – Thurs bus now 1902, was 1804
-   Last Fri bus now 1902 was 1950
-   Last Saturday bus now 1645, was 1750
-   Last Sunday bus now 1615, was nil

<u>Route 10 to Buninyong replaced by Route 21</u>

-   Last Mon – Thurs bus now 1938, was 2023
-   Last Fri bus now 1938, was 2106
-   Last Saturday bus now 1720, was 1753
-   Last Sunday bus now 1650, was 1836

<u>Route 12 to Sebastopol replaced by Route 22</u>

-   Last Mon – Thurs bus now 1948, was 1953
-   Last Fri bus now 1948, was 2125
-   Last Saturday bus now 1848, was 1830
-   Last Sunday bus now 1718, was 1835

<u>Route 13 to Delacombe replaced by Route 24</u>

-   Last Mon – Thurs bus now 1902, was 1903
-   Last Fri bus now 1902, was 2105
-   Last Saturday bus now 1751, was 1750
-   Last Sunday bus now 1651, was 1700

### **Koo Wee Rup – Pakenham update**

Further to the list of outer metropolitan and regional bus routes with
updated timetables from 29 January coinciding with the new V/Line
timetable, Kingstons updated the timetable for their Koo Wee Rup –
Pakenham link to maintain connections with V/Line’s South Gippsland
coach services.

### **Koo Wee Rup – Fountain Gate ‘Xpress’ proposal**

Westernport Coachlines, part of the Dineen Group, have floated a
proposal with the local community and PTV to run a privately funded
‘Xpress’ route between Koo Wee Rup and Fountain Gate Shopping Centre,
stopping at Casey Hospital in Berwick (also providing access to the
local TAFE and university). Currently those wishing to travel to
Fountain Gate from South Gippsland have access to a weekly Thursday
shoppers bus provided by Cleeland Bus Lines originating from Phillip
Island, otherwise they must travel via Cranbourne to connect with Route
841 or travel via Pakenham and change again to the hourly Route 926.

The route would operate for an initial three-month trial, with the
proposed timetable as follows:

-   Weekdays ex Koo Wee Rup: 0920, 1145 and 1345
-   Weekdays ex Fountain Gate: 1045, 1245 and 1715
-   School Holiday Weekdays ex Koo Wee Rup: 0920, 1145, 1345 and 1615
-   School Holiday Weekdays ex Koo Wee Rup: 1045, 1245, 1500 and 1715
-   Weekends ex Koo Wee Rup: 0920 and 1500
-   Weekends ex Fountain Gate: 1100 and 1600

Journey times appeared to be about 45 minutes each way. The timetable is
designed to allow transfers to the South Gippsland V/Line services at
Koo Wee Rup.

They had hoped to commence the service on 19 December but objections
from other local operators (Ventura and Kingston’s) have delayed the
proposal – Kingston’s operating the Pakenham route while Ventura
operates Routes 841 and 926, the Cowes V/Line trips and a school bus
from Koo Wee Rup to various schools in Berwick and Beaconsfield.

### **Caroline Springs and Hurstbridge consultation results**

PTV have recently released the results of the consultation for the new
Route 343 service proposed to be introduced between Greensborough and
Hurstbridge in coming months, supplementing the single track train
service.

840 people took part in the consultation, 45% Diamond Creek residents.
59% of respondents were regular users of public transport (at least 3 -
4 times a week). No consensus was reached on which option is favoured -
428 preferred option 2 operating through St Helena over the faster
option along Diamond Creek Road. Feedback suggests people would
appreciate better access to facilities in St Helena (the existing 580
bus only passes within 750m of the shopping centre). As to be expected,
the feedback also attracted comments that a St Andrews link would be
welcomed, no doubt due to the drop-in session being held in the PM peak
at Hurstbridge.

Feedback results were also released for various changes to bus services
in coming months for Caroline Springs. 62.9% of respondents preferred
option A for the south-west part of the suburb, which would see 462
extended onto Deer Park Station, versus 37.1% who would rather 456
divert into the area (providing an Albion connection instead) and a
separate 464 service between Caroline Springs and Deer Park.

In terms of interchange for the new Ballarat Road turn-up-and-go
corridor, 38% of people preferred Albion (faster trip) compared to 29%
who would rather interchange at Sunshine (with more facilities). A third
of respondents had no preference.

The first stage of the Caroline Springs network changes took place on 29
January, with Route 460 extended to Caroline Springs Station with a more
frequent timetable, while Route 461 now travels via City Vista Ct in
Plumpton South.

### **January detours**

A moment of carnage in Melbourne’s CBD around 1330 on Friday 20 January
saw several pedestrians run down (five sadly killed) after a reckless
driver mounted the footpath on Swanston St and Bourke St at high speed
in an attempt to evade police, ending a crime spree of more than 24
hours across Melbourne. The aftermath saw many CBD streets blocked as
emergency crews assisted victims and to allow police investigations to
take place, with some street closures continuing until the following
morning.

Detours to bus services included:

-   Bus services along Lonsdale St were terminated on Victoria Parade
    near Parliament station during the afternoon peak and in some cases
    into the evening
-   Routes 200 and 207 commenced on the CBD fringe at Lygon St and
    Queensberry St
-   Similarly, Routes 250 and 251 commenced on the CBD fringe at the
    southern end of Rathdowne St
-   Crosstown Routes 216, 219 and 220 diverted along Spencer St and in
    some cases Wurundjeri Way
-   Routes 232 from North Altona and 235 and 237 from Fishermans Bend
    terminated at Southern Cross
-   Routes 234 and 236 from Garden City terminated at Flinders St, using
    Market St to turnaround
-   Route 605 did not enter the CBD, instead commencing return trips to
    Gardenvale near Melbourne Park on Olympic Boulevard.

Due to the Australia Day Parade in Melbourne CBD, the 1015 and 1140
trips ex Gardenvale on CDC Melbourne Route 605 diverted via Exhibition,
Latrobe, Queen and Lonsdale Streets. Passengers wanting to board at
Flinders St station were directed to the stop at Flinders Lane and Queen
St but this stop was also being bypassed.

Victoria’s Gay and Lesbian community gathered for the annual Midsumma
Pride March in St Kilda on 29 January, which resulted in buses on CDC
Melbourne 606 from Port Melbourne terminating at Mary and Park Streets,
St Kilda from 1330 until 1700, with no service to Elwood or Elsternwick,
with passengers told to walk to Barkly St to access Routes 246, 600 or
922. Meanwhile, Transdev Routes 600 and 922 terminated on Barkly St at
Carlisle St and did not proceed to St Kilda station.

### **FAPAS retains Rosebud extension**

The previously reported announcement on the SkyBus website regarding
stop changes to their Frankston and Peninsula Airport Shuttle service
from 6 February was revised in mid January, removing reference to plans
for delete the once daily return service to the peninsula towns of
Dromana and Rosebud. Stops within St Kilda are still to be removed
however, to push people onto their St Kilda express route.

### **Thomastown Depot opening ahead**

The planned opening date for Transdev’s new depot on High St, Thomastown
is likely to be Monday 6 March, the third new facility to be constructed
in the last year as part of their contract with the Victorian
Government. The new depot will end the current lease of space at
Tullamarine Bus Lines’ Airport West depot (an arrangement dating back to
the formation of the Green and Yellow Orbitals in 2010) while selected
North Fitzroy depot shifts will also be located. A final list of routes
is not yet available, but a number of trips on Routes 250, 251 and 350
are expected to be operated by Thomastown Depot in addition to routes
901 and 902.

### **Code Red Fire Days in the Dandenongs**

Ventura have published a list of routes in the Dandenong Ranges that
will not operate on days where a Code Red Fire Day is declared by the
Country Fire Authority. Services from five depots (Croydon, Knoxfield,
Lilydale, Monbulk and Pakenham) would be affected. The following routes
won’t run at all:

-   Route 663 (Belgrave – Lilydale)
-   Route 694 (Belgrave – SkyHigh Mt Dandenong)
-   Route 695 (Belgrave – Gembrook)
-   Route 695F (Gembrook – Fountain Gate)
-   Route 696 (Olinda – Monbulk)
-   Route 697 (Belgrave – Belgrave South)
-   Route 699 (Belgrave – Upwey)
-   Route 840 (Gembrook – Pakenham).

The following would be partially suspended:

-   Route 679 (Ringwood – Chirnside Park)
-   Route 688 (Croydon – Upper Ferntree Gully)
-   Route 693 (Belgrave – Oakleigh)
-   Route 755 (Knox City – The Basin – Bayswater)
-   Route 838 (Emerald – Fountain Gate).

In late 2015 Metro Trains advised that Belgrave Line trains would
terminate at Bayswater on such days, with a shuttle bus for Boronia and
Ferntree Gully, but no service to the four stations beyond.

## **Western Australia**

From Sunday 29 January:

-   Time changes for routes 25, 27, 310, 344, 346, 347, 371, 384, 385,
    386, 387, 388, 389, 480, 490, 491, 508, 509, 527, 567, 568, 598, 998
    and 999;
-   Routes 24, 463, 518, 519, 593, 594 and 990 had time changes and
    additional services;
-   Route 518 had a minor route change now servicing Cockburn Gateways
    Shopping Centre;
-   Route 519 had some services extend to Riva Ent during peak periods;
-   Routes 103 (short services) and 481 had time changes and operate
    with less services due to poor patronage;
-   Route 23 had minor time changes and additional services not listed
    on the timetable departing Claremont station at 0813 and 0837, and
    Elizabeth Quay Bus Station at 1550 and 1755.

**Thanks** to Jason Blackman, Craig Halsall, Victor Isaacs, Matthew
Jennings, Peter Parker, Michael Smith, Hayden Ramsdale and various
contributors on *Australian Transport Discussion Board.* for Bus news.

# **LETTER TO THE EDITOR**

***Craig Halsall*** *writes about V/Line timetables:*

I wish to highlight some ongoing issues with timetable information for
V/Line coaches that may interest readers.

## **Orbost and Lakes Entrance corridor**

Regular *Table Talk* readers might recall my previous review of the
V/Line coach timetable for Marlo, Orbost and Lakes Entrance that failed
to show the full timetable offering and was inconsistent between the
V/Line and PTV websites. The V/Line timetable from 29 January now lists
the inbound coaches from Batemans Bay and Narooma for Orbost passengers
– but the twice-weekly Capital Link coach into Bairnsdale is still not
shown, nor is the twice-weekly intertown service from Gelantipy via
Lakes Entrance. The numerous issues with the timetable on the PTV
websites for intertown routes sadly remain outstanding and I plan to
follow these up again shortly.

## **Apollo Bay Summer Timetable**

Apollo Bay passengers looking for the timetable showing the additional
trips over the peak summer holiday season needed to be savvy, with the
PTV website’s Apollo Bay intertown timetable failing to be updated to
show the extra services. Passengers were required to reference the
separate Warrnambool - Melbourne via Apollo Bay and Geelong V/Line
timetable elsewhere, which comes up second in search results. The V/Line
and McHarry’s websites both featured a downloadable PDF showing the
complete summer timetable. This issue was highlighted to V/Line via
Twitter but never resolved.

## **Cowes and Wonthaggi Connections**

In November 2009 a comprehensive network of connecting buses were
introduced across South Gippsland, timed to meet V/Line coaches to
Melbourne and Dandenong. These upgrades were funded in lieu of the
broken ALP state government promise to reopen the Leongatha line. One
feature of the network was an intertown route from Cowes to Wonthaggi
timed to meet V/Line coaches at Anderson to/from the opposite town –
e.g. the intertown bus leaving Cowes meets the Dandenong-bound coach
that originated at Inverloch and Wonthaggi. At times this bus then meets
the outbound Cowes coach, picking up transfers for Wonthaggi. V/Line
tickets are both sold and accepted the intertown route, which is
operated by the Moreland Group’s South Coast Bus.

(It is noted that the Intertown bus will only wait up to 10 minutes for
late arrivals, otherwise cabs are arranged for passengers, also operated
by the Moreland Group under the ‘South Coast Taxi’ banner.)

When the upgrades began, a comprehensive South Gippsland booklet
timetable was produced, including However, the intertown bus connection
is not well communicated to those travelling to the towns from
Melbourne, in particular those holidaying in Phillip Island, nor new
local residents. The journey planner on the PTV website currently is not
programmed to show these guaranteed connections for the outbound
direction, while they are simply omitted from the V/Line journey
planner, which only shows those services as part of the V/Line network.
Additionally, both the online and printed V/Line timetables previously
failed to show these connections. With the timetable changes from 29
January V/Line has made a very weak attempt to rectify the situation,
however one wonders if they were not sure what they were seeking to
document. The weekday timetable towards Melbourne now shows the
intertown trips between Cowes and Anderson with a hard to spot footnotes
stating the connections are a “Private Coach” and to change vehicles at
Anderson. The midi bus used on the route is wheelchair accessible but
the timetable fails to show this. The connecting times for the coach
through to Dandenong are shown, but not the faster Melbourne connection
(ex Leongatha and Yarram) from Koo Wee Rup. Lacking however is the
equivalent intertown bus connections from Inverloch. Furthermore the
weekend timetables do not show these connections, nor do any of the
timetables departing Melbourne or Dandenong. Effectively only one eighth
of the potential connections are listed!

One hopes that future timetables can incorporate all relevant
connections and the journey planner issues can be resolved.

## **Cowes tracking**

On a separate note, Ventura has just introduced online tracking for
their Cowes V/Line services on their website via interactive maps for
each service. These are the first V/Line coaches to offer GPS tracking,
so Ventura should be commended for the innovative. Oddly though, like
most V/Line sub-contractors, there is no link from the Ventura website
to the online timetable – one would hope there are onboard posters
promoting the live tracking.

# **AIR NEWS**

## **International**

### **Qantas** news:

-   The seasonal Sydney-Denpasar, Bali route will become year-round from
    March, operating four times a week.
-   Daily Melbourne-Tokyo Narita flights commenced 16 December 2016.
-   The second daily Melbourne-Los Angeles route will become the first
    Qantas service to be operated by Boeing Dreamliners from
    15 December 2017.

**Thanks** to Victor Isaacs for Air news.

# **RECOMMENDED READING**

*Green Fields and Blue Sky: On Nick Cleary’s fast-rail dream, CLARA,* by
Paddy Manning*,* in the *Monthly* magazine, December 2016-January 2017
issue, pages 56-63.

[*http://theconversation.com/high-speed-rail-at-200-billion-wed-better-get-it-right-62541*](http://theconversation.com/high-speed-rail-at-200-billion-wed-better-get-it-right-62541)

[*http://the-riotact.com/high-speed-rail-we-need-to-talk-about-clara/187644*](http://the-riotact.com/high-speed-rail-we-need-to-talk-about-clara/187644)

These three articles provide critical appraisals of the proposal by the
CLARA (Consolidated Land and Rail Australia) consortium to build a
high-speed railway Sydney-Canberra-Melbourne, financed by large-scale
land development along the route (eight new cities).

*We Are All Travelers: Celebrating 100 Years of Travellers’ Aid
Australia*, by Alicia Cerreto with Sarah Reed, published by Travellers’
Aid Australia, Melbourne,
[www.travellersaid.org.au](http://www.travellersaid.org.au) 2016,
paperback, 96 pages, \$29.95. This little book gives a history of an
unusual aspect of travel in Australia. The Travellers’ Aid organisation
is currently very active and prominent at both Southern Cross and
Flinders St stations in Melbourne and at Seymour. It was once
nation-wide, but strangely has disappeared elsewhere in Australia.

*We’re loco if we accept these standards on trains,* by Hugh Lunn,
*Australian,* Wednesday 25 January, page 12. A very critical, but
realistic, description of travel from Brisbane to Sydney on NSW Train
Link’s XPT.

*Railway Gazette International*, January 2017, contains two insightful
articles about developments in European passenger train services:

-   *Open access gains ground*, about the mixed results of open access
    passenger train operators;
-   *A brighter future at night*, about ÖBB Austrian Railways expansion
    of its overnight passenger train operations.

# **RECOMMENDED WEBSITE**

*Passenger Train Services over Unusual Lines* is a long-established
British publication giving details of workings over unusual and rare
trackage. Its website is
<http://www.psul4all.free-online.co.uk/intro.htm> The site also includes
links to unusual passenger workings in the rest of the world. The World
beyond Europe section commences with details of Australian services. The
direct web link to this is
<http://www.psul4all.free-online.co.uk/wbe.htm> However it is advisable
to read the general introduction first to understand how and why
services are included. NZ unusual services also appear in the World
beyond Europe section.

# **ODD SPOT**

Passengers travelling on Virgin Trains East Coast’s 1430 train from
London King's Cross to Edinburgh on New Year's Day were given a fright
when a scorpion was spotted. The pet, which is thought to have come from
Guatemala, crawled out of an ice cream container belonging to a
passenger. It meant passengers were held up for around eight minutes at
Peterborough while the affected carriage was sealed off and checked.
British Transport Police quickly recaptured the creature and took it to
an exotic pet rescue centre in Lincolnshire, where it now has a new home
and has given birth

# **About *Table Talk***

***Table Talk*** is published monthly by the Australian Timetable
Association Inc. (Registration No. A0043673H) as a journal of record
covering recent timetable news items. The ATA also publishes the
***Times*** covering timetable history and analysis. Contributions are
invited and are very welcome. Please send these to the appropriate
Editor. ABN 74248483468.

The **deadline** **for *Table Talk*** is the second last weekend of the
month, but contributions are welcome at all times.

**Editor, Rail and Tram, Air, Ferry:** Victor Isaacs,
***<tabletalk@austta.org.au>*** 11 Blacket St Downer ACT 2602.

**Editor,** **Bus**: As an interim arrangement, please send your Bus
news to ***<tabletalk@austta.org.au>***

**Production and Mailout**: Geoff and Judy Lambert.

**Proofreaders:** Agnes Boskovitz, David Cranney and Geoff Hassall.

Original material appearing in ***Table Talk*** may be reproduced in
other publications but acknowledgement is required.

**Membership of the Australian Timetable Association** includes monthly
copies of the *Times*, *Table Talk*, the Distribution List of
timetables, and Auction catalogues. The membership fee is \$60 (Adult)
and \$36 (Junior) pa. Membership enquiries should be directed to the
Membership Officer, Len Regan, at ***<treasurer@austta.org.au>***

Back issues of ***Table Talk*** are available on the Australian
Timetable Association’s website, ***[austta.org.au](https://www.timetable.org.au),*** after two months.

**Table Talk Newswire** is an advance monthly email of Rail news. To
obtain this, contact the Rail Editor.
