---
layout: page
title: Table Talk - September 2016
author: Australian Timetable Association
subject: Transportation
---
<div style=" font-family: TimesNewRoman, 'Times New Roman', Times, Baskerville, Georgia, serif;
            font-style: italic;
            font-weight: bold;
            font-size: 36pt;
            text-transform: uppercase;
            color: black;">TABLE TALK</div>

# **AUSTRALASIAN TIMETABLE NEWS**

**No. 289, September 2016 ISSN 1038-3697, RRP \$4.95**

**Published by the Australian Timetable Association**

[**www.austta.org.au**](https://www.austta.org.au)

## **RAIL AND TRAM NEWS**

**Queensland: Townsville port connection**

Federal Minister for Infrastructure and Transport Darren Chester has
confirmed a \$3 million commitment for the development of a development
case for the Townsville Eastern Access Rail Corridor (TEARC) project.
This will provide a new eight km freight line connecting the North Coast
and Mount Isa lines with the Port of Townsville. Queensland’s Department
of Transport and Main Roads says the TEARC will allow 1400-metre trains
to access the port. Train lengths are currently limited to 1000 metres
on the Mount Isa line, and 650 metres on the North Coast line.
Infrastructure Australia has the upgrade of the Mount Isa to Townsville
rail corridor – which includes the TEARC – listed as a medium term
priority initiative, in the business case development stage. The
Minister said the Federal commitment was dependent on it being matched
at the State level.

**Queensland Rail: Central West line**

The Queensland Government has launched the third stage of a program to
replace, repair and upgrade ageing timber rail bridges on Central West
line, with tenders worth \$8.8 million to replace up to 18 bridges, and
69 bridge piers with more durable structures. In stage one of the
program 49 timber bridges were replaced or repaired. In Stage two,
completed last year, a further 23 bridges were replaced or upgraded
between Clermont, Emerald and Winton.

**Queensland Rail CityTrain: Kippa-Ring line**

Advice from Queensland Rail is that the requirements of the signalling
system for the Kippa-Ring line to open are soon expected to be fit for
purpose. To finalise track and signalling there was to be a long
shutdown - in kilometerage - on the weekend of 27 and 28 August all the
way from Northgate to Gympie North. This was also for other work, viz,
Kippa Ring line works, signalling upgrade, points upgrade, overhead line
maintenance, stabling yard projects at Elimbah and Woombye (for the new
generation electric trains), track reconditioning, level crossing
reconditioning, and track maintenance. The Spirit of Queensland (diesel
tilt train) will only run in both directions north of Gladstone, the
Rockhampton tilt train is replaced by buses entirely, and the Saturday
departure of the Spirit of the Outback from Brisbane on Saturday 27
August was rescheduled to depart the day before at 1810.

Then there will be another long shutdown - this one in time duration
including four weekdays - from Zillmere to Caboolture from late on 16
September until early on 23 September. Over 200 buses will be used to
transport passengers on the Sunshine Coast / Caboolture line during the
closure. Express replacement services between Elimbah and Boondall will
cater for Sunshine Coast commuters, while suburban passengers will be
bussed between Caboolture and Zillmere. Additional Shorncliffe line
trains will operate. An opening date for the Moreton Bay Rail Link has
yet to be announced.

**Queensland Rail Travel: Tilt Train replacement**

The Electric Tilt Train refurbishment program is taking much longer than
expected. Therefore the interim Brisbane-Rockhampton timetable, with a
replacement locomotive and carriage set, will remain in effect until
probably April 2017.

**Queensland Rail Travel: Subsidies**

A reply on 28 July to a Parliamentary Question to Queensland Minister
for Transport, Stirling Hinchliffe, indicated the extent of subsidies to
passengers on QR long distance services. Each trip on the Westlander
(Brisbane-Charleville) is subsidised about \$4,000 while each trip on
the Inlander (Townsville-Mount Isa) is subsidised about \$3,500, not
including concessions. The total cost in subsidies to the State
Government for these two services has increased to more than \$30
million for the last financial year. A one way trip from Brisbane to
Charleville costs an adult passenger about \$148.50, leaving QR to pay
thousands of dollars more for the actual price. The subsidy cost for the
Westlander service has almost doubled from figures released in 2013,
from \$2,236 to \$4,007. The cost for the Inlander is up 70%, from
\$2,038 to \$3,436. The Westlander made 3,677 passenger journeys and the
Inlander made 4,526 in the 2015/16 financial year. A spokeswoman for Mr
Hinchliffe said the services were an essential public service.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 **Estimated total cost**   **Estimated passengers**   **Subsidy per passenger**
  -------------- -------------------------- -------------------------- ---------------------------
  Spirit\        \$71m                      112,460                    \$632
  of Qld                                                               

  Spirit\        \$21m                      12,189                     \$1,724
  of Outback                                                           

  Rockhampton\   \$31.5m                    133,099                    \$237
  tilt train                                                           

  Bundaberg\     \$15.9m                    47,237                     \$338
  tilt train                                                           

  Westlander     \$14.7m                    3,677                      \$4,007

  Inlander       \$15.5m                    4,526                      \$3,436

  Gulflander     \$1.2m                     1,907                      \$641
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**John Holland Rail NSW Country Regional Network WTTs 6 August and 15
October**

JHR’s new Working Timetable of **6 August 2016** – reported in July
*Table Talk*, pages 2-3 - is now available on their website at
<http://www.jhrcrn.com.au/what-we-do/network-operations-access/standard-working-timetable-swtt/>
At first, the schedules for Fridays were missing from every line. After
some time, Friday was reinstated to the week and a corrected version
posted.

A further JHR NSW CRN WTT dated **15 October** has been issued and is
also available at the same website. There are very few alterations in
this WTT and they are all in the Western area, viz:

-   AR72 Saturdays and Sundays will depart Airly Balloon Loop 1157,
    arrive Airly Balloon Loop Junction 1202, depart 1207, pass Ben
    Bullen 1228, Baal Bone Junction 1239, Wallerawang 1320, Coxs River
    1325 thence as per previous WTT
-   AR86 (PNC 850m) every day is renumbered ER86
-   ER64 (PNC 850m) every day is renumbered LS64 and increased in length
    from 745m.
-   The following Pacific National freight trains (all formerly every
    day, 850m) are deleted: AR95, AR96, AR77, AR78.

Presumably, we can also expect **ARTC** and **Sydney Trains** WTTs on or
about 15 October.

**Sydney Trains WTT 2017**

A portion of Hornsby yard is to close temporarily in 2017 for
reconstruction and expansion. During the possession period a number of
sets will require relocation from Hornsby car sidings to stable
elsewhere on the network. This will be reflected in the 2017 WTT.

**Sydney Trains: Late 2018 timetable**

Big changes are likely when the Chatswood to Epping line is closed in
late 2018 for conversion and integration into the Sydney NW Metro. It is
believed that:

-   Richmond services will no longer run to and from the City and will
    instead run to and from Leppington.
-   Inner West services will be extended from Homebush to operate to and
    from Parramatta.

This raises the following speculation:

-   The existing North Sydney to Emu Plains service could be extended to
    run to and from Hornsby via the North Shore line. This could result
    in a more even spread of services between the City and Hornsby (via
    the North Shore Line), after taking into consideration services to
    and from Hornsby (via the Main). This could also result in a better
    use of the turnback facilities at Lindfield or Gordon, if desired,
    to terminate and start services more closely to Chatswood.
-   This may be the reason why Richmond services will not run to and
    from the City. Current up and down Richmond services need to be
    timetabled for the crossing loops on the Richmond branch and may not
    fit well with the spread of service on the North Shore line. Four
    services an hour to/from the West, and four services an hour to/from
    the North (Main Line), could see a service running through Chatswood
    every 7 to 8 minutes in the off-peak.
-   The existing City-Leppington Service could be altered to run to and
    from Campbelltown. This would mean the existing 4-car Y-Link
    Schofields-Campbelltown service would cease to operate.
-   Richmond/Leppington services may run with a 4-car consist, although
    current afternoon peak services running Schofields to Campbelltown,
    with 4-car consist, depart Parramatta with a full train load.
    Services, therefore, may need to be built-up to 8-car consists for
    the peak period.

**NSW Train Link: Interesting trackwork**

On the weekend of **10 and 11 September** the main NSW Southern line
will be closed for scheduled trackwork from Campbelltown and Leppington
to Fairfield, and Liverpool to Bankstown (probably really means Sefton
Park Junctions). This will mainly affect services of **Sydney Trains**,
which will be replaced by buses. It will also, of course, affect **NSW
Train Link** passenger services. All Melbourne trains during the weekend
will be replaced by buses between Goulburn and Sydney and v.v. In recent
years, Southern line closedowns have resulted in all Canberra trains
being replaced by buses for the entire journey. Not so on this occasion.
Instead:

-   The morning trains Canberra-Sydney trains, midday trains in both
    directions and evening Sydney-Canberra trains will be replaced by
    buses between Campbelltown and Sydney or v,v only;
-   Even more interestingly, the evening trains (at 1720) from Canberra
    on both days, and the morning trains (at 0657) from Sydney on both
     days will run for the full journey between Canberra and Sydney and
     v.v.. Within the Sydney suburban area, rather than taking the
     usual route, they will travel via **ARTC**’s South Sydney Freight
     Line. This will be a real boon for those who like travelling over
     rare trackage.

**NSW freight enhancements**

On 8 August NSW Minister for Freight, Duncan Gay, announced funding of
\$15 million for pilot projects to improve the NSW rail freight network.
This includes the reopening of the line from Maimuru to Demondrille on
the former Cowra Line (56 km). The projects are:

-   \$5 million towards the reinstatement of the Maimuru to Demondrille
    line\$3 million for rail siding extension at Hillston to service a
    major grain receival site
-   \$2 million for the reinstatement of a 2.8 km section of the Moree
    to Inverell railway line at Moree
-   \$1.5 million to extend a siding extension at Barellan to service a
    major grain receival site
-   \$1.5 million to extend a siding extension at Burren Junction to
    service a major grain receival site
-   \$1 million to upgrade a siding at the Canberra Railway Freight
    Terminal (at Fyshwick in the ACT)
-   \$1 million for detailed planning and design of the reinstatement of
    the non-operational line from West Tamworth to Westdale (about 4
    km), a new turnout at the centre of Dunmore Loop at Shellharbour, a
    new turnout at Unanderra, and a new crossing loop near Tarago.

**Aurizon: NSW coal contract**

Aurizon has obtained its first coal haulage contract in the Southern
Coalfields of NSW. It will rail 800,000 tonnes per annum for Wollongong
Coal’s Wongawilli Colliery to Port Kembla Coal Terminal from August 2016
to August 2018. Aurizon will use existing locomotives and wagons to
service the contract.

**Newcastle tram**

Downer EDI has been awarded the contract to build the Newcastle light
rail. NSW Minister for Transport and Infrastructure Andrew Constance
announced on 9 August that the 2.6 km line will now be built with
embedded instead of ballasted track, and that small changes to the
alignment around Worth Place and Stewart Avenue had been made.

**Hunter Valley coal**

Consideration by the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission of
the proposed takeover by Aurizon of Glencore Rail’s coal haulage
operations in the Hunter Valley revealed the following current
proportions of coal haulage on the Hunter Valley coal network:\

Pacific National 59%, Aurizon 23%, Glencore Rail 17%, Southern Shorthaul
Rail 1%.

**Moorebank terminal**

Logistics firm Qube has acquired full control of the in-development
Moorebank Intermodal Hub after it agreed to buy out joint venture
partner Aurizon. It acquired Aurizon’s 33% interest in the Moorebank
Industrial Property Trust for \$98.9 million. Aurizon said the decision
to sell its stake in Moorebank came after it secured a 10-year lease at
the nearby Enfield Intermodal Logistics Centre, which is owned by Port
Botany owner NSW Ports. Aurizon started operations at Enfield on 9 May.
“Enfield fulfils Aurizon’s current customer, capacity and operational
needs,” the company said in a statement. “Due to the open access nature
of the Moorebank Terminals, the divestment will not affect Aurizon’s
ability to access the Moorebank facilities in future.”

**ARTC industrial action**

Industrial action by ARTC train control and administrative staff had a
major affect on services on the ARTC network in NSW and NE Victoria.
Staff struck from 0700 Wednesday 3 August to 0700 Sunday 7 August, and
for two hours on Monday 8 August. TrainLink regional passenger trains
were replaced by buses, as were local services in the Hunter Valley and
Southern Highlands. In Victoria, Albury V/Line services were replaced by
buses. Interstate freight trains and coal trains in the busy Hunter
Valley lines were stopped for four days. It is believed, however, that a
few interstate freight trains operated. The industrial action was a
result of a struggle between the Rail Tram and Bus Union and ARTC over
an enterprise agreement to cover roughly 580 staff in NSW. ARTC chief
John Fullerton said the cost of the strike was estimated at \$10 million
a day. Staff were seeking a 4% pay rise over three years and guarantees
of employee entitlements. Further industrial action had been proposed
for 24 hours from 0700 Thursday 18 August and again on 23 August, but
this was overtaken by staff agreement to a new enterprise agreement.

**V/Line Freight WTT 4 July**

A new Working Timetable for freight trains operating over the V/Line
network, dated 4 July 2016, is available on their website at
<https://corporate.vline.com.au/Network-Access/Network-service-plan> In
a reversion to pre-CTC days, freight trains no longer ascend the
Ingliston Bank; but run via Leithbridge. They do, however, descend the
Bank in the wee small hours.

**V/Line: Ballarat line**

Duplication of the railway between Deer Park West and Melton commenced
in early August. About a kilometre is being duplicated, to be opened at
the same time as Caroline Springs station in early 2017.

**V/Line: Armstrong Creek line?**

A feasibility study commissioned by the Victorian Government details
several potential projects to cope with rapid suburban expansion at
Armstrong Creek and along the Surf Coast, and the infrastructure needed
to build a railway. Under the potential roll-out, tracks would be laid
from a new rail junction veering off from the Warrnambool line between
the Surf Coast Highway and Barwarre Road to a new station at Armstrong
Creek.

**Level crossing city (soon to be non level crossing city)**

Trains will not stop at Carnegie and Murrumbeena throughout September,
as work begins on the Melbourne sky rail project. Both stations are
being elevated and rebuilt as part of the Victorian government’s level
crossing removal project along the Cranbourne-Pakenham line. In a bid to
minimise long disruptions both stations will be closed after the last
train on Sunday 28 August and reopen on 26 September when temporary
stations are built. A second closure of Carnegie station is scheduled in
November for further work.

**Melbourne Metro Tunnel**

Construction work will begin next year on three massive shafts in the
CBD for the Melbourne Metro Tunnel project. These will be at the future
CBD North station at Franklin and A'Beckett Streets and CBD South
beneath the City Square. Construction company John Holland won the \$324
million excavation contract, which includes the 35-metre deep shafts and
acoustic sheds to reduce noise. A car park under City Square will be
partially demolished to allow construction of CBD South station. The
government says creating the shafts will involve the removal of the
equivalent of 34 Olympic-sized swimming pools of rock and soil. Premier
Daniel Andrews said commuters would not need a timetable when using
Melbourne Metro. "If you've not made the last train the next one will be
there in just a few minutes' time," he said.

**Metro Trains Melbourne: Delays 9 August**

An overhead wire in Dandenong broke and came down on top of a Metro
train early in the morning of Tuesday 9 August, taking out rail services
for the outer south-east during rush hour. Metro Trains passengers were
left frustrated, but were at least able to catch hastily arranged buses.
However, 160 passengers aboard the 0436 V/Line train from Traralgon were
trapped for three hours between Hallam and Dandenong.

**Victorian all-night transport**

On 2 August the Victorian government announced that the trial of all
night public transport on weekends has been extended six months until
June 2017. This will allow services to be assessed over a full 12 month
period and help organisers plan for the massive line up of events
between January and June, including the Australian Open, Formula 1 Grand
Prix and the Comedy Festival. It will also ensure all night public
transport is on offer for the start of next year’s footy season. An
average of 35,000 people use Night Network every weekend – and more than
20% are shift-workers. There are 300 overnight train services, 250 tram
services or around 500 bus services each weekend.

**Adelaide Metro: Industrial action**

An industrial dispute caused Belair line trains to be cancelled in the
middle of the day on Thursday 25 August. On Friday 26 August trains on
the Belair and Grange lines were cancelled until 1900 and reduced on
other lines.

**Perth transport plan**

The Perth Transport Plan “for 3.5 million people and beyond” was
launched on 29 July by Transport Minister Dean Nalder. Key rail projects
proposed would extend the suburban train network from 180 to 300km,
including:

-   a new railway to Morley and East Wanneroo
-   extending existing suburban railways from Butler to Yanchep, Midland
    to Bellevue, Armadale to Byford and Thornlie to Cockburn Central.

The plan recommends Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) to areas where the level of
demand does not warrant heavy rail. These would connect Ellenbrook to
Bassendean Station and Midland to the new East Wanneroo rail link. BRT
or light rail would connect Glendalough Station to Scarborough Beach. A
light-rail service, “the Knowledge Arc”, is proposed between the
University of WA, the QEII medical centre, the CBD, Curtin University
and Canning Bridge.

A railway to Ellenbrook is canvassed in the plan for “beyond 3.5 million
people” but, unlike other previous proposals, involves a spur line to
Marshall Road in Malaga. Marshall Road is believed to be part of a new
rail line between the city and the northern suburbs. The first stage
will involve a tunnel from the CBD, with the second stage linking it to
the Joondalup line.

The plan also does not include the formerly-proposed MAX light-rail
system between Mirrabooka and the CBD.

The plan does not include specific costings. However, some projects that
have already been announced are funded, including the \$2 billion
Forrestfield Airport Link, the \$1.9 billion Perth Freight Link, the
\$1.1 billion Northlink project and the \$49 million Ellenbrook BRT.

However, Colin Barnett, WA Premier, said construction of a railway to
Ellenbrook could happen much earlier than envisaged in the Plan. On 5
August he said "Ellenbrook will come. It will get a rail line. The
comment I make is simply that I would expect, as successive governments
determine their priorities and make decisions on individual projects, I
would expect a rail line to Ellenbrook would be well before 2050".

On the other hand, on 17 August, the WA Treasurer, Mike Nahan, told
State Parliament that research to assess the route and cost of a
proposed underground heavy rail link from Perth CBD to the eastern
suburb of Morley will take "years" to complete. Although this was
identified as a priority project in the Perth Transport Plan, there has
been open disagreement between senior Cabinet members over which of the
projects identified in the report should be commissioned first.
Transport Minister Dean Nalder has said the Morley rail link should be
the Government's top priority, and wants planning underway by the end of
the year. Treasure Mike Nahan believes the Government would get more
value for money building a link from Thornlie to Cockburn, connecting
with the Mandurah Line.

**Perth enhancements**

Salini Impregilo and NRW joint venture has been selected as the
“preferred respondent” to deliver the main works of the
Forrestfields-Airport line.

Construction of Perth Stadium station on the Armadale line is now at an
advanced stage. Construction of Aubin Grove station of the Mandurah line
started in March. East Perth is being upgraded to partially handle
crowds from the new Perth Stadium. (Most of the crowds will use the new
Perth Stadium station).

**Rio Tinto: Driverless trains**

Rio Tinto’s planned iron ore mining expansion program could be delayed
for two years due to ongoing issues with the implementation of
driverless trains. This might force the company to develop more rail
infrastructure instead, with implications for its financial position.
Software problems are the main issue.

**Thanks** to John Abrams, Tony Bailey, Scott Ferris, Craig Halsall,
Victor Isaacs, Geoff Lambert, Dennis McLean, Len Regan, Michael Smith,
ABC News, *[www.railexpress.com.au](http://www.railexpress.com.au),
[www.railpage.com.au](http://www.railpage.com.au), Age, Australian,
Daily Telegraph, Herald Sun,* *Sydney Morning Herald* and *The Westland*
(Rail Heritage WA ARHS WA) for Rail news

## **RECOMMENDED READING**

“Rail access in Western Australia” by Michael Gillooly in *The
Westland*, magazine of Rail Heritage WA (ARHS WA), issue 282, 2016,
pages 30-36. It summarises the legal basis of rail access in Australia,
and in particular in WA.

## **ODD SPOT**

In August 2011, David Harris wrote to the British *Daily Telegraph*
newspaper:

It is a surprise to me that, while rail companies call their passengers
‘customers’ and trains ‘services’ they still use the outmoded ‘stations’
and ‘platforms’. Perhaps customers of this newspaper can suggest modern
alternatives.

Cynthia Harrod-Eagles responded:\

Can I suggest ‘transit hubs’ and ‘access facilities’?

David Brown responded:\

How about ‘Customer Regional Assembly Point’ and “Customer Rallying And
Migration Pier’? In the interests of brevity, acronyms could be
substituted.

Iain Harris responded:\

A platform should be an ‘elevated and ramped non-organic customer-rail
modal interface facilitation device’.

**From** *Leaves on the Line: Letters on Trains to The Daily Telegraph,*
edited by Gavin Fuller, published by Aurum, 2012.

## **BUS NEWS**

###**Australian Capital Territory**

**Transport Canberra**’s new timetable commencing 27 August takes a new
format. Instead of one large (216 pages) Weekday Timetable book, there
are now separate books for Gungahlin (80 pages), Belconnen (108 pages),
Central Canberra (88 pages), Woden and Weston Creek (96 pages) and
Tuggeranong (88 pages). Inevitably there is some duplication between
these books. The Weekend Timetables for all of Canberra remain
consolidated in one book (140 pages, the same as formerly). All these
books have the new Transport Canberra branding. There is also a
stand-alone pamphlet timetable for the 81/981 tourist route.

Weekday changes effective Monday 29 August:

-   Blue Rapid weekday off-peak services now provide a ten minute
    service between Tuggeranong-Woden-City-Belconnen-Kippax along routes
    300, 313 and 343 with 300 extended to Kippax. Previously these
    routes provided a 7/8 minute service
    Tuggeranong-Woden-City-Belconnen and a 15 minute service on to
    Kippax.
-   New route 182 “The Weston Line” provides a 30 minute service from
    the City to Woden via Cotter Road, Molonglo Valley and Cooleman
    Court.
-   Routes 83 Woden-Cooleman Court and 783 City-Cooleman Xpresso now
    serve Coombs as well as Wright.
-   Morning peak-hour inward trips on 54 Belconnen-Crace-Gungahlin now
    extend to the City and Parliamentary Zone as route 254. Afternoon
    peak hour outward trips also operate.
-   Morning peak-hour inward trips on 16 Kippax-Latham-Florey-Belconnen
    now extend to the City, Woden and Tuggeranong as route 316,
    afternoon peak hour outward trips also serve Tuggeranong, Woden and
    the City as route 316.
-   81 Tourist Loop now serves the new Tourist Information Centre at
    Regatta Point and Westside Acton Village.
-   Xpresso 743 Barton-City-Macgregor-Dunlop-Fraser and 744
    Barton-City-Holt-Macgregor have additional services.
-   Route 88 Woden-Alexander Maconochie Centre (prison) has been
    adjusted to align with the Centre’s visiting hours and no longer
    serves Chisholm.
-   Routes 4 and 5 now serve City West in the evenings.
-   Morning 7A City-National Museum are replaced by normal route 7
    services.
-   “Green Line” branding has returned for Routes 4 and 5 through
    Manuka, Kingston, Barton and Russell. All trips after 1700 now
    originate at City West, including a later 2201 departure for Route 5
-   Similarly, “Gold Line” branding has been resurrected for the
    combined 2 and 3 corridor from Civic to Deakin via Parkes, Barton
    and Forrest.

Weekend changes effective 27 August:

-   Adjustment of tourist route 981 to match changes to weekday route
    81,
-   Extension of route 983 into Coombs to match changes to weekday route
    83,
-   Timing adjustments to route 980 to provide better access to
    Fyshwick, and
-   Additional services to AMC prison for changes in visiting hours.

**Qcity Transit shuttles to Brumbies Final**

Friday 22 July saw the Brumbies play a Super Rugby final against the
Highlanders at GIO Stadium. With the early 1800 kick-off time, Transport
Canberra arranged Qcity Transit to provide the shuttles departing Woden,
Tuggeranong, Belconnen, City and Gungahlin, allowing ACTION to operate
their usual afternoon peak services. Game ticket holders had free travel
across the ACTION network after 1500.

**New VIP passes**

Transport Canberra have begun rolling out new electronic travel passes
for visually impaired passengers that can be read by the myWay ticketing
equipment. This will enable collection of travel pattern information,
which can be used to target locations for infrastructure upgrades, such
as tactiles. The existing passes can still be used.

**Election promises**

Following the launch of Transport Canberra’s City Loop bus in early July
(see above), the Liberals proposed an alternative City Hopper service.
It would operate clockwise along a larger route incorporating the War
Memorial, Russell, the Parliamentary Triangle and the National Museum,
but it has been slammed by critics as being too indirect and more akin
to a tourist service, thus endangering the private Canberra Explorer
route. The service, expected to cost \$900,000 per year, would require
passengers to pay standard fares, unlike the free Route 101 service.

At the ACT ALP Labor conference on 23 July, Chief Minster Andrew Barr
foreshadowed a 12-month trial of free bus travel between 1000 and 1600
for seniors and other concession card holders should the Party be
re-elected. This comes after the recent Territory budget announced moves
to raise the eligibility age for senior cards from 60 to 65 over the
next decade.

### **New South Wales**

**Apps:**

A potential benefit of smart ticketing systems is being
explored on Sydney’s public transport network, with at least one app set
to use Opal live data to help passengers avoid crowded buses. Travel app
‘NextThere’ became the first to use the data on 24 August, launching a
new feature which uses icons on services to indicate the volume of
people travelling on the service. TfNSW expects more transport apps,
including TripView, Metrarove, Arrivo and TripGo, to access the live
data and provide additional information for their users.

Data from NSW's Opal electronic ticketing system shows that Sydney's
busiest bus route is the 400 from Burwood in the west via Sydney Airport
to Bondi Junction – the only bus that drops passengers at the airport.
About 16,000 journeys are taken on a typical week day.

The Opal data is providing transport planners with a more accurate
picture of demand for services across Sydney's trains, buses and ferries
than the traditional method of counting passengers at stops and
stations. In the evening peak, M20 buses between Sydney's CBD and the
fast-growing Green Square precinct in the inner south are also
consistently among the most crammed. Since 2011, an extra 490 services
have been put on routes to and from Green Square. A boom in apartment
construction at Green Square and neighbouring suburbs such as Waterloo
has led to a surge in population and demand for public transport.

In the mornings, the 900 bus that provides a shuttle around central
Paramatta, the 55C "Gong Shuttle" in Wollongong, and the 617X from Rouse
Hill to Sydney's CBD feature among the most crowded.

On Wednesday morning, real-time data from Opal showed 71% of the 900
services had standing room only, while three out of every five 55C and
617X buses had no seats available for passengers.

While the 400 service remains the only bus to stop at Sydney Airport,
the government has [committed to providing an extra two bus
services](http://www.smh.com.au/business/uber-effect-weighs-on-sydney-airports-earnings-from-car-parking-20160817-gqv8ig.html)
– one from the city's south and another from the inner west – when a new
interchange is completed at the domestic terminal in 2018.

**Use of Shuttle Buses**

The State Government is considering a plan to boost the number of buses
available in peak hours by utilising private shuttle buses owned by
schools, clubs, nursing homes etc which would transport commuters to
local rail stations and bus hubs. The proposal is the antithesis of one
proposed some years ago in Victoria where it was suggested that it would
be more efficient that local bus operators undertake community bus work
rather than having many organisations each using their own bus on a
limited basis.

**Red Bus Route 44 timetable adjustment**

Effective 27 June the weekday 0818 Erina Fair – Gosford trip on Route 44
no longer services Erina High School.

**Transit Systems Route 804 and 805 timetable updates**

A new timetable was introduced on 805 (Cabramatta – Liverpool) from 4
July to improve reliability. Buses now travel directly along Edensor
Road and Humphries Road due the long-term closure affecting Bunker
Parade in Bonnyrigg. An earlier change on 26 April saw weeknight
departures on 804 towards Bonnyrigg and Liverpool adjusted to improve
train connections at Fairfield.

**Sydney Buses Service Changes Effective 5 September:**

-   Route 202 services now run between Northbridge and North Sydney
    during peak hours, but continue to the City at other times. All
    trips from Castlecrag on Route 203 now end at North Sydney and trips
    to Castlecrag now commence from Milsons Point, the City no longer
    being served.
-   Routes 252 services now run between Lane Cove West and North Sydney
    during peak hours, but continue to the City at other times. All
    route 254 services now run between Riverview and McMahons Point, the
    City no longer being served.
-   Route 290 now operates between Epping and City-Erskine St only in
    the early morning and late evening. Most 290 trips are replaced by
    new route 291 which operate between Epping and McMahons Point.
-   With additional trips to McMahons Point being operated by routes 254
    and 291 morning and afternoon 265 short trips between North Sydney
    and McMahons Point now no longer operate.
-   Timetable adjustments are made to routes 261 285 286 287 288 289 292
    293 294 and 297.
-   These service changes coincide with the introduction of a \$2 (\$1
    concession) discount on Opal fares where a change of mode takes
    place, as travellers need to transfer to trains to complete journeys
    to and from the City.

**New Timetables Effective 5 September 2016 on
[www.sydneybuses.info](http://www.sydneybuses.info)**

- 202 203 204 205 206 207 208 209 East Lindfield and Northbridge to City
and Milsons Point
- 251 252 253 254 Lane Cove West and Riverview to McMahons Point and City
- 258 285 289 533 534 Sydney Olympic Park, Ryde and Lane Cove Industrial
to Chatswood and City
- 261 Longueville and Northwood to City
- 265 269 McMahons Pt to Lane Cove and Kirribilli
- 286 287 288 290 291 294 297 Epping and North Ryde to McMahons Point and
City
- 292 293 Marsfield to City

**State Transit Route 132 timetable adjustment**

The weekday 0650, 0718 and 0737 North Balgowlah Shops – Manly trips on
Route 132 shifted six minutes earlier on 25 July.

**State Transit Route 341 bites the dust**

One of Sydney’s shortest bus routes ran for the last time on 29 July.
State Transit’s 341 ran a 1.5km path between Randwick Boys High School
at Avoca St and the Nine Ways roundabout travelling along Rainbow St,
Kennedy St and Meeks St. Two interpeak services ran in each direction,
timed at 6 to 7 minutes. Rainbow St continues to be served by the
full-time 418 (Burwood – Bondi Junction). The sister 342 shopper
service, running a 4 minute 800m route serving the Our Lady of the
Scared Heart Convent in nearby Darceyville, continues to operate.

**Queanbeyan Interchange display**

Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional Council have installed a display at
Queanbeyan Bus Interchange detailing the history of bus services in the
area from 1900 to the present day. It pays tribute to local cross-border
operators over the years including Tetley Motor Service, Mrs Barton’s
Safety Coach Service, Quodling Bros, Lever Buses, Deanes Bus Lines and
QCity Transit.

**Busabout:** From Monday 27 June 2016, all route 893 and S17 services
were re-directed to operate to their original route along Springs Road,
Spring Farm. As a result, these services no longer operate along the
Camden Bypass and Liz Kernohan Drive between Richardson Road and
Macarthur Road. New web timetables for 890 891 892 893 898 Campbelltown
to Mt Annan, Narellan and Harrington Park and 899 S17 Camden to Narellan
and Catherine Field effective 27 June 2016 are available. The printed
timetables are still effective 1 June 2014.

**Transdev North:** From Monday 4 July, minor timetable changes have
been made on Route 565 to reflect the closure of the UTS Kuring-gai
campus. Transdev are issuing a computer print-out timetable for 565
effective 4 July 2016.

**Hillsbus:** Commencing 1 August:

-   611: Blacktown to Macquarie Park has extra trips departing Blacktown
    at 0715, 0730, 0745, 0755 and 0805, providing a bus every five
    minutes in the morning peak.
-   619: Castle Hill to Macquarie Park has extra trips departing Castle
    Hill at 0733, 0757 and 0813, providing a bus every 8 minutes in the
    morning peak.
-   638: 0649 bus from Berrilee will now operate to Pennant Hills.
    Passengers for Castle Hill will transfer at Round Corner Dural to
    route 637 service departing at 0723.
-   702: 1445 Blacktown to Seven Hills service leaves at 1500.

Hillsbus are issuing computer print-out timetables effective 1 August
for 611/630, 619, 637/638/639/640/641/644 and 702, 700, 705, 706, 711,
T61 have new web timetables effective 25 July 2016.

### **Northern Territory**

**Saturday evening buses for Malak Markets**

Additional route 12 services have been introduced to Malak Markets on
Saturday evenings. They will operate during market season from the last
Saturday in April until the last Saturday in October, departing
Casuarina at 1920, 2025 and 2115. The last Saturday bus for the
remainder of the year departs at 1845.

**Darwin Events**

A twilight NRL game between Parramatta and Gold Coast was played at TIO
Stadium in Marrara on Saturday 11 June. Free buses operated to and from
Darwin, Casuarina, Palmerston interchanges, along with a return service
from Humpty Doo and Coolalinga Park+Ride.

V8 Supercars returned to Hidden Valley Raceway from June 17 to 19, with
a ‘Pitlane Express’ network in operation, free on presentation of gate
passes. Five frequent routes operated to the track from several Darwin
suburbs, with a further seven routes operating limited services from
rural localities.

Those traveling to Territory Day celebrations at Mindil Beach on Friday
1 July had a free ride after 1500 if they advised their driver that was
their destination. Extra buses ran on Route 4 to/from Casuarina, 8
to/from Palmerston and 15 to/from Darwin CBD.

TIO Stadium in Marrara hosted an evening AFL match between Melbourne and
Fremantle on Saturday 9 July. Spectators could catch free buses serving
at Darwin, Casuarina, Palmerston interchanges, along with a return
service from Humpty Doo and Coolalinga Park+Ride.

Special event buses again operated for the Darwin Show on Friday 22 July
and Saturday 23 July. Regular services departed from interchanges at
Darwin, Casuarina, Palmerston plus a regular shuttle from Humpty Doo via
Coolalinga Park+Ride. On Darwin Show Day on 22 July, a public holiday
timetable operated across the city.

For the Palmerston Sprint Race Day on Saturday 30 July, Buslink ran a
free shuttle every 10 minutes departing Darwin Turf Club from 1600 until
1800. On Darwin Cup Day on Monday 1 August, shuttle buses ran from
Darwin, Palmerston and Casuarina before and after the meet. Picnic Day
on 1 August meant a public holiday timetable again operated on regular
route services.

**Route 14 afternoon adjustments**

A timetable update commencing 25 July saw the 1630 14c deviation to
Darwin Waterfront on weekdays cancelled while the 1645 14 trip to Cullen
Bay now departs at 1640.

### **Queensland**

**Mackay**: In late 2016 a new bus network will be introduced. The new
network will have routes numbered in the 300 series and will be operated
by Mackay Transit Coaches for Translink rather than under the qconnect
umbrella as at present. The new network will comprise:

-   300 Hospital to Andergrove via West Mackay, City and Mt Pleasant
    (replaces 2 City-West Mackay and 5 City-Andergrove)
-   301 University to Beaconsfield via City and Mt Pleasant (replaces 6
    City-Beaconsfield and 9A City-University)
-   302 City-East Mackay (previously 1)
-   303 City-Ooralea via South Mackay (replaces 3 City-East Mackay)
-   304 City to Mackay Harbour (previously 12)
-   305 City-Slade Point (previously 4 or 4A via M  Pleasant)
-   306 City to Mt Pleasant via Glenella (replaces 8 City-Glenella)
-   307 City to Blacks Beach (previously 7)
-   308 City to Shoal Point (previously 7)
-   309 City to Sarina (previously 10)
-   310 City to Mirani (previously 9 City-Walkerston and 11
    City-Mirani).

**Sunshine Coast**: With the opening of the Sunshine Coast University
Hospital in early 2017 the following changes are proposed:

-   600 Caloundra-Maroochydore Monday to Friday frequency decrease from
    12 to 15 minutes
-   607 Caloundra-University extended to Sunshine Coast University
    Hospital bus station and Monday to Friday increase from 60 to 30
    minutes and 60 minute weekend service introduced)
-   611 Maroochydore-Sunshine Coast University Hospital via Mooloolaba
    and Kawana (new with 30 minute Monday to Friday and 60 minute
    weekend frequencies)
-   614 Maroochydore to Kawana Monday to Friday frequency decrease from
    30 to 60 minutes

At the same time the 639 Nambour Local Service (comprising a Northern
loop, Western loop, South Western loop, Palmwoods loop and Eastern loop)
will be replaced as follows:

- 610 Maroochydore to Nambour via Kunda Park will have six trips a day extended to Rotary Garden Village, previously served by 639
- 612 Maroochydore to Nambour via Bli Bli will incorporate part of the 639
Northern loop along Coronation Avenue
- 636 Nambour to University via Buderim will incorporate part of the 639
Eastern loop
- 637 Nambour to Burnside new service will replace the 639 Western and
South-Western Loops
- 638 Nambour to Palmwoods previously 639 Palmwoods Loop
- 637 and 638 will be Hail n Ride services until sufficient bus stops are
installed.

### **South Australia**

**Adelaide Metro**: In conjunction with the Torrens (River) to Torrens
(Road) project to lower South Road to provide a four km uninterrupted
stretch of road, a trial T2T Express service was introduced between
Arndale Centre Park ‘n’ Ride and the City. Buses leave Arndale at 0728,
0745, 0757 and 0807. Buses leave Victoria Square at 1627, 1641, 1657 and
1712. The aim is to get motorists off South Road and onto public
transport. Passengers would then have to get another service onto other
destinations normally reached from South Road.

**Bus and Tram Priority**

Buses and trams will be able to request priority at certain traffic
lights following the adoption of some aspects of the “Operation Moving
Traffic: report by the S.A. Government. Late running buses and trams
will be able to get priority treatment at these traffic lights in order
to recover time or prevent further lateness. Other actions proposed in
the report included increasing the number of bus lanes, including an
extended inbound lane on Anzac parade; trialling a super frequent
service on one key route; reducing the number of bus stops on selected
routes; extending and joining up bicycle lanes. It was also recommended
to explore the use of indented bus stop bays, which are something of a
rarity in Adelaide, particularly the inner suburbs (the old MTT
operating area). The report also suggested there were too many car
parking spaces available in the Adelaide CBD, however this was rejected
by the Minister.

**Premier Stateliner downsizes**

Kanga Coaches purchased the tours and charter division of Premier
Stateliner effective 1 July, including six coaches. The Goolwa – Victor
Harbour – Adelaide route transferred to LinkSA as of 27 June with media
reports suggesting Premier Stateliner could no longer maintain the
current contract, expiring in late 2017. The existing timetable
continues to operate. Premier Stateliner continue to operate regional
routes to Port Lincoln and Ceduna passing Port Augusta and Whyalla;
coastal and inland services for Mt Gambier; and to the Riverland towns
of Renmark and Loxton.

### **Victoria**

**Plenty Valley network begins**

Sunday 24 July saw the introduction of the new Plenty Valley bus network
operated by Dysons across the outer north suburbs of Mill Park, South
Morang, Mernda, Doreen and Whittlesea. The network consists of:

-   381 (South Morang – Diamond Creek via Doreen)
-   382 (Northland – Whittlesea via Bundoora RMIT, South Morang and
    Mernda)
-   383 (University Hill / Bundoora RMIT - Pallisades Estate via South
    Morang)
-   384 (Whittlesea – Kinglake via Eastern Hill and Humevale)
-   385 (Greensborough – Mernda North – Whittlesea via Apollo Parkways
    and Doreen)
-   386/387 (University Hill / Bundoora RMIT – Mernda North via South
    Morang)

Of the discontinued services, 382 replaces the most of trunk 562
Northland – Whittlesea service, with the connecting 565 service
renumbered as 384. 520 from Greensborough is largely replaced by the 385
with north-eastern parts of the Doreen now covered by 381. Route 385
also provides expanded coverage to central Doreen poorly serviced prior
to May, with both 381 and 385 serving the catchment of the former 572 in
Doreen.

386 and 387 effectively replace 572 through Mernda and Mill Park Lakes,
incorporating new coverage. Both routes then operate directly along
Plenty Road to Bundoora RMIT, replacing 572’s former cooks tour of Mill
Park, with those along Centenary Drive and Blossom Park Drive now served
by 383. The 383 service follows the old 573 within Mill Park Lakes, with
a minor change to serve Marymede Catholic College and the site of the
proposed train station.

To encourage Mernda commuters to utilise public transport prior to the
extension of rail services in 2019, buses on 382, 386 and 387 each
operate every 20 minutes during peak periods between Bundoora RMIT and
Mernda North. Doreen residents also have access to 20 minute peak
frequencies along the 381 to South Morang or 385 to Greensborough. For
many this is a boost on the former indirect 520 and 572 services in
Doreen and Mernda that only operated every half hour, with Yarrambat and
Apollo Parkways residents also enjoying a 33% increase in peak
frequencies

Two “Turn up and go” corridors are a highlight of the upgraded network,
with a combined 10 minute headway at peak times and 20 mins interpeak,
early evenings and on weekends, linking to most train services.
Unfortunately, services cease around 2130, so they cannot lay claim to
being true Trainlink services.

Together 381 and 382 form one corridor operating along Plenty Road and
McDonalds Road from the Bridge Inn Road intersection to South Morang
Station. 386 and 387 offer a combined corridor along The Lakes Boulevard
and Plenty Road to South Morang station and the 86 tram terminus at
Bundoora RMIT. Whittlesea Council and a local advocacy group are pushing
for tram services to extend along the latter corridor, with the recent
state budget providing funding for a million dollar feasibility study.

To encourage residents to walk further to access more direct trunk
corridors, peak services on the 383 only operate half-hourly, however
this is an improvement for Mill Park Lakes residents over the old 573
which only operated at 40 minute headways. Centenary Drive and Blossom
Park Drive residents merely retain the status quo. 383 features school
deviations to serve both campuses of Mill Park Secondary College.

Interpeak services of the each of the main routes (381. 382, 383, 385,
386 and 387) operate at 40 minute headways, connecting with every second
train. This effectively is a downgrade for passengers along the former
520 and 572 services, who previously had two buses an hour, spaced at a
20-40 minute frequency. On weekends each of these routes operate every
40 minutes, a gain on the former hourly headways.

Feedback received during consultation resulted in PTV amending their
plans to retain a direct link from Whittlesea to South Morang Station
and Northland, with the old 562 largely retained with minor changes but
renumbered 382. Buses now operate at 40 minute intervals across the
week, a boost for weekend travellers. Peak shortworkings have been
retained between Mernda North and Bundoora RMIT.

Unlike 562 however, 382 accesses Northland more directly along Albert
St, bypassing the former East Preston tram terminus – earlier changes
made in May saw 567 from Regent re-routed along Tyler St as
compensation. Additionally, buses depart South Morang Station via
McDonalds Road rather than via Bush Boulevard. Within Whittlesea, 382
services now continue along Oakbank Boulevard, Wallan Road and Black
Flat Road before terminating back in the town centre, a newer part of
town previously unserviced. Those living in the older parts of town in
Eastern Hill (near the showgrounds) must transfer to a connecting 384
bus that meets most services, with selected trips also continuing onto
the semi-rural locality of Humevale (as did the former 562). As the 384
shuttle also incorporates former 565 Whittlesea - Kinglake trips, there
are sometimes gaps of 80 to 90 minutes on weekdays to allow the bus to
travel 30 km out to Kinglake and back.

Some trips on 384 are operated by the buses outstationed at the
Whittlesea yard however on weekends the 384 timetable is largely
integrated with the 382 timetable, with most arrivals from Northland
doing a “Whittlesea Waltz” around the new north-west loop before heading
out to Eastern Hill and then returning back towards South Morang and
Northland. While there is very minimal layover as a result, a closer
look at the timetable reveals mid-trip dwells at South Morang to meet
both train arrivals and departures. There are now five weekday return
trips to Kinglake compared to the former two, however this includes an
oddly timed outbound trip from Whittlesea at 0454 which is effectively a
dead movement.

The election promise to reinstate a direct connection to Greensborough
has been fulfilled by extending every second weekday 385 service from
Mernda North providing a 40 minute headway during peaks and 80 minutes
during the day and after 1900. On weekends passengers for Laurimar Town
Centre and Greensborough must transfer at Mernda North, with connections
of around 10 minutes. Rudimentary facilities currently exist at the
interchange point, with a lack of footpaths or shelters.

The East-West branded 570 service between Thomastown and Bundoora RMIT
also enjoyed upgrades from the same day, with the previous 30 minute
headway to be boosted to every 20 minute, now harmonised with interpeak
trains, while evening services have been extended from 1945 until 2100.
Weekend services have been introduced for the first time (40 minute
headway) while buses now operate through the University Hill complex.
The 570 has returned to the Bundoora depot in conjunction the upgrade
after briefly operating from the Reservoir depot.

Announcements in media releases have stated 20 new buses were required
to deliver these substantial upgrades, along with the employment of 50
additional drivers. By early August, 18 new deliveries in PTV colours
had been accounted for, plus the additional East-West arrival. In the
interim, Dysons were noted to use older low floor buses on these routes
and the Wollert network introduced in January, including those acquired
from Northern Bus Lines and Reservoir Bus Company.

To make room for this fleet increase, 19 buses and 45 drivers based at
Bundoora depot relocated to Reservoir depot on 27 June, with a large
number of shifts on routes 508, 513 and 567 affected. It is expected
that this arrangement will remain until a replacement depot opens in
Epping North in 2018. As reported in the last issue of *ABP*, the lease
agreement with Transdev to house approximately 15 buses for 901 and 902
orbital shifts was terminated effective 5 June, freeing up the required
space at the Reservoir depot.

**Transdev**

From Sunday 13 March, all Transdev services in the western suburbs
(routes 215, 216, 219, 220, 223 and 232 plus Port Melbourne area routes
235, 236 and 237 were re-timetabled to improve service reliability and
in some cases train connections. From the following day Crown Coaches
ceased supplying buses for AM school runs.

In a second change, all Transdev routes in Melbourne (including those
impacted in the March changes)

received timetable alterations effective from 5 June. The changes should
mean fewer late buses as running times have been altered to more
realistically reflect actual running times. An average of 2-5 minutes
has been added to weekday running times and between 3-7 minutes on
weekends. Some running times have been reduced as well. Actual changes
included Doncaster Dart routes 907 & 908 upgraded from every 30 to every
20 minutes most of the day on weekends; route 370 gained a Sunday
service, with similar times to Saturday and route 279 lost last Sunday
trip ex Box Hill. However the Sunday finish time remains much later than
the Saturday finish. It also appears that the new timetable will now see
regular running of Transdev’s four articulated buses on regular weekend
services.

The June timetable revamp also (finally) kicks in Transdev’s compliance
requirements with key performance indicators which had been deferred
following the Government’s rejection of the Greenfields network proposal
in 2015 and due to delays with the implementation of a GPS tracking
system. The original punctuality target of 90% has, however been revised
downward to 85%.

This change also coincided with the opening of a new temporary depot in
Laurens St, North Melbourne to house some buses from North Fitzroy and
Doncaster whilst various works are undertaken at those locations.

A dedicated drive through passenger drop off zone has been added to the
Thompsons Road/ Bulleen Road bus stop as part of an upgrade. Other works
included installation of two additional bus bays with passenger shelters
and improved accessibility; new information displays, pedestrian
pathways and landscaping.

Also from 5 June, Transdev buses are no longer based at the Dyson’s
depot in Reservoir with the space there needed by Dysons due to their
recent and on-going expansion of route services. Transdev buses were
relocated to other depots the previous day, mainly to Tullamarine,
pending the opening of a new depot at Thomastown expected in August.

**Rail Replacement Frenzy**

June and July saw one of the biggest periods of rail replacement in
Melbourne’s history as work was conducted on seven separate level
crossings removals in eastern and south-eastern Melbourne, along with
other shutdowns to allow for routine maintenance.

On the Queen’s Birthday Long Weekend (11 – 13 June) buses replaced
trains on the Glen Waverley line between Richmond – Darling and
Caulfield – Darling. On Saturday and Sunday buses replaced
Belgrave/Lilydale line services Parliament - Box Hill, with express
services via the Eastern Freeway. On Queen’s Birthday trains operated
east of Camberwell. The Alamein line was completely suspended across the
weekend. Works at Camberwell Tram Depot and Camberwell Junction over the
same long weekend also saw replacement buses operating east of
Riversdale Junction (70) and Hawthorn Bridge (75), along with much of
the 72 on the Queen’s Birthday evening. Ventura operated the majority of
the replacements, with Kastoria assisting on the tram replacement.

Buses from Ventura’s Dandenong and Seaford depots assisted with weekend
rail replacement between Caulfield and Westall on 19 and 20 June as
early works for Skyrail project continued, such as tree removal and
erection of lineside fencing.

Tram works along Whitehorse Road in Balwyn saw the 109 replaced by buses
Kew Depot – Box Hill from Saturday 25 June until Wednesday 29 June, with
around 15 buses provided by Ventura.

A 37-day shutdown saw services on the Frankston line suspended between
Caulfield and Moorabbin from 2100 Friday until last service Sunday 31
July, allowing for the grade separation works and station rebuilds to
take place at North Road Ormond, McKinnon Road McKinnon and Centre Road
Bentleigh. All stations buses travelled via Grange and Jasper Roads
while express buses utilised Bambra Road, Thomas St and Nepean Highway,
with around 75 buses needed during weekday peaks. Operators involved in
the shutdown included Ventura, Nuline, Kastoria, Sita and Dysons with
Quinces also making a rare appearance on at least one afternoon. The
Sandringham Line operated to a modified peak timetable for the duration
of the works, with an additional service added each peak to cater for
Frankston Line passengers using the line as an alternative.

McKinnon station reopened on Monday 1 August with new stations at Ormond
and Bentleigh set to reopen by the end of August. Ventura and Nuline
continue to provide a shuttle bus services for those requiring Ormond or
Bentleigh. Further shutdowns took place on 13-15 and 27-28 August as
works concluded. The weekday shutdown on Monday 13 August saw long
morning peak queues at Moorabbin with some passengers taking more than
20 minutes to board a bus. Limited advice to passengers meant few sought
alternative routes. Express Frankston Line services, suspended from 16
November 2015 to allow closure of the third track as part of the works,
will finally resume on 5 September 2016.

Meanwhile, another 100 buses replaced the Belgrave/Lilydale lines east
of Box Hill from Saturday 2 July until Sunday 10 July while level
crossings were removed at Blackburn Road, Blackburn, Heatherdale Road,
Heatherdale along with Mountain Highway and Scoresby Road in Bayswater,
along with other maintenance works. Further shutdowns are scheduled over
coming months to complete the works.

Weekend buses came from various Ventura depots, running all stations
services along with limited express services travelling via the Eastern
Freeway and Eastlink Tunnels between Box Hill and Ringwood.

A complex of array of services ran on weekdays to provide efficient
journeys to the outer ends of both lines for commuters, with operators
generally delegated to select service patterns that included:

-   Box Hill – Mooroolbark – Lilydale
-   Box Hill – Ringwood East – Croydon
-   All stations Box Hill – Lilydale
-   Box Hill – Boronia then all stations to Belgrave
-   Box Hill – Boronia then all stations to Upper Ferntree Gully
-   Box Hill – Heathmont – Bayswater
-   All stations Box Hill – Belgrave
-   Blackburn – Heatherdale – Ringwood
-   Blackburn – Mitcham
-   Blackburn – Nunawading – Mitcham
-   Blackburn – Nunawading

Among those assisting were CDCM Oakleigh, Crown, Dineen Group (Berwick
Bus Lines, Martyrs, McKenzies, Panorama & Warragul Bus Lines (West
Gippsland Transit)), Driver, Dysons, East-West, Fallons, Jay-Tee,
Northern Transit Holdings (Broadmeadows, Kastoria & Seymour Coaches
(Mitchell Transit)), Nuline, Quest, Quinces, Sita, Transdev and of
course Ventura. The charter operators largely provided coaches, a rare
occurrence for Metro rail replacement. Fallons provided low floor
vehicles and drivers from both the Shepparton and Wangaratta depots,
which parked overnight at the Kastoria depot in Tullamarine.

A third occupation during the same intense week (2 to 10 July) saw
Dysons and East-West vehicles operate tram replacement for routes 55, 57
and 59 due to the reconstruction of Abbottsford St Junction. Passengers
were encouraged to make use of various east-west routes to reach the 19
Sydney Road tram and/or connecting trains, with only limited buses
connecting to trams between the northern side of the works and the CBD.

Routine maintenance and further early Skyrail works took place on the
evenings of 17 – 20 and 24 – 28 July between Caulfield and Oakleigh.
CDCM’s Oakleigh depot provided the bulk of the buses, with artics from
Ventura Dandenong assisting to cater for heavy loadings.

Further details regarding the Skyrail construction method suggest much
of works will be completed while trains operate underneath, with a
specialist gantry crane to be used. However, ten weekend shutdowns are
planned for the remainder of 2016, with more to come as the project
progresses. The first major works will see trains skip Carnegie and
Murrumbeena from 29 August until 25 September while existing station
buildings are demolished. A bus shuttle will operate for affected
passengers. The works also necessitate long-term carpark closures, with
additional parking being made available at other stations, including
stations on the Glen Waverley line. So far there has been no increase in
feeder bus services to provide an alternative method to access stations.

Localised shuttles have been used during some of the above level
crossing works, taking commuters and site workers to offsite carparks.
They have operated at times at Blackburn and Bayswater as well as during
the main Frankston Line shutdown.

**Coronet Bay and St Leonards updates**

After ongoing low patronage resulted in the downgrade of the Westernport
Coaches “Waterline shuttle” in June last year, PTV announced a revised
timetable, suggesting the service would be retained. The service links
the South Gippsland coastal communities of Coronet Bay, Corinella and
Tenby Bay to Grantville and connecting V/Line coaches to Dandenong,
Cranbourne and Wonthaggi. Timing changes now allow daytrips from
Melbourne on weekdays and Saturdays, while a new lunchtime round trip
has been added on Saturdays. On Sundays, the morning round trip has been
deleted, with the only trip timed for people who are returning home
after a weekend away in either Coronet Bay or Melbourne.

Meanwhile, PTV and McHarrys have introduced a new 60A shuttle service
between St Leonards and Drysdale on weekdays from 17 July, connecting
with regular 60 trips. This provides a further six trips in each
direction.

**End of an era for Sandringham Depot, Thomastown Depot works begin**

Sunday 14 August was the final day of operation for Trandev’s
Sandringham depot, which had operated various routes in the Bayside
suburbs including selected shifts on their cross-town routes originating
from nearby Brighton Beach and Gardenvale. The depot dates back to 1919
when tram services commenced to Black Rock (later extending briefly to
Beaumaris), and was the base for the Victorian Railways buses to
Beaumaris and Southland for many years, transferring to The Met/MTA
train division in 1983, MetBus in 1993 and Melbourne Bus Link in 1998. A
new depot in Heatherton near the corner of Warrigal Road and Kingston
Road opened the day after the closure with 903 red orbital shifts also
relocating from Keysborough depot.

Both Sandringham and Footscray depots were sold to Melbourne Bus Link in
1998 as part of the original contracts signed with the Liberal State
Government at the time. (In contrast, Doncaster and North Fitzroy depots
were leased to National). Melbourne Bus Link since sold both depots to
developers in 2014, who have continued to lease the depots back to
Transdev, pending closure to make way for apartment construction. A
closure date for Footscray Depot, to be replaced by a new depot in
Sunshine West, has yet to be announced.

Transdev held a soil turning ceremony attended by local politicians and
councillors in July to mark the start of works for a third new depot, to
be located on High St, Thomastown in early 2017. It will house up to 50
buses and 100 staff. The depot will operate shifts on the orbital
SmartBus network, replacing the interim leased space at Tullamarine Bus
Lines’ Airport West premises along with the former arrangement with
Dysons to share their Reservoir depot that concluded in June.

With the recent depot and timetable changes, route allocations as at 14
August are as follows:

-   200, 207, 279, 281, 284, 285, 293, 295, 302, 303, 304, 305, 309,
    905, 906, 907 and 908 shared between Doncaster, North Fitzroy and
    North Melbourne depots
-   215, 216 and 223 are exclusively Footscray depot runs
-   219, 220, 600, 922 and 923 shared between Footscray & Heatherton
    depots
-   232, 234, 235, 236 and 237 shared between Doncaster, Footscray,
    North Fitzroy & North Melbourne depots
-   246, 250, 251 and 350 shared between North Fitzroy & North Melbourne
    depots
-   270, 271, 273, 280, 282, 364, 370 and 380 are exclusively Doncaster
    depot runs318 is shared between Doncaster and North Melbourne depots
-   901 and 902 operate from Airport West, Keysborough & Doncaster
    depots, with Heatherton Depot doing 901 TAFE shuttles in Dandenong
-   903 is operated by Doncaster, Footscray, Heatherton and North
    Fitzroy depots

**SkyBus St Kilda service starts, Southern Cross stop shifts**

SkyBus introduced their direct St Kilda – Melbourne Airport service from
Sunday 14 August with a week of introductory free travel. Buses depart
from four stops around St Kilda every 30 minutes between 0617 and 1847
on weekdays with hourly weekend departures from 0617 to 1917. The \$19
one-way fare matches the rate from the CBD (which includes free hotel
transfers). Skybus advises passengers allow around 45 minutes for their
trip, depending on which stop they use.

By 22 July SkyBus departures from Southern Cross Station to Melbourne
Airport had relocated to bay 75 on the opposite side of the coach
terminal, previously used for drop-offs for V/Line arrivals. A new
walk-in ticket office and self-service kiosks near the coach terminal
entry have replaced the ticket booth adjacent to bay 50. The new office
is unmanned between 2300 and 0400 with passengers required to use the
card-only self-self kiosks or buy an online ticket on their smartphone.
Arrivals and hotel transfers remain at bay 51.

**709 extension to Noble Park**

Ventura’s 709 Mordialloc – Waterways service will be extended north to
Noble Park effective Sunday 28 August, providing daytime bus services
into Keysborough South for the first time following a six-year campaign
by local residents and Greater Dandenong Council. Buses will also serve
Parkmore Shopping Centre. Trips depart roughly every 30 minutes until
1900 seven days a week, requiring three vehicles, with a doubling
service along the existing route. An hourly early evening service
operates until 2100. Journey planner results suggest a 1h 15 min commute
from Keysborough South to the city with similar journey times via either
Mordialloc or Noble Park. Dandenong depot will continue operate the
service. Interestingly, parts of Keysborough South have been served by
the Night Bus 979 since January!

**Monash University Transport Interchange upgrade**

Works have begun to upgrade the transport interchange at Monash
University’s Clayton Campus, due for completion in February in time for
the 2017 academic year. The project is being delivered in conjunction
with a new Teaching and Learning Building. Temporary bay changes took
affect effective 15 August, with the 737 Croydon service relocated to
depart outside Robert Blackwood Hall on Scenic Boulevard while the
Berwick and Peninsula intercampus buses now leave from the intersection
at Scenic Boulevard and Sports Walk.

**Special Sunday Open Day services for 401 shuttle**

To assist prospective students from Melbourne’s west and north-west
travelling to the University of Melbourne Open Day on Sunday 21 August,
PTV has arranged the 401 express shuttle from North Melbourne Station to
operate, departing at 10 minute intervals from 1000 until 1600.
Generally the route only operates on weekdays other than selected public
holidays when university classes or exams are held.

**Victorian commuters who evade fares will now be held accountable under
a single system**

The Victoria Government has announced wide-ranging reforms to make the
fare enforcement system more simple, fair and effective. The changes
abolish on-the-spot penalty fares and create a single infringement
system. The previous \$75 penalty fare meant a passenger could get
caught fare evading more than 20 times in one year, and still pay less
than the cost of a regular Zone 1 and 2 yearly pass. Penalty fares were
also anonymous, so there was no record kept of serial offenders, meaning
the worst fare evaders couldn’t be identified and targeted. The changes
are supported by a range of measures to make it easier for passengers to
travel with a valid ticket. These include reducing the time it takes to
top up online from 24 hours to 90 minutes, trialling fast top-up devices
on trams stops and major stations and reviewing concessions and
concession IDs. The new enforcement system will begin on 1 January next
year, to provide time for staff training, public education and
legislative change to bring the changes into force.

**BusTracker arrives in Bendigo**

Real-time bus departures for Bendigo Transit services were switched on
for the PTV app, website and selected third-party apps on 27 June, as
part of the rollout of the BusTracker system to regional areas. It is
understood Geelong, Ballarat and the LaTrobe Valley will be
progressively switched on over coming months.

**Regional Consultation**

Residents on Bendigo’s outskirts were surveyed on their bus travel
habits in April and May, as part of network revisions proposed for the
townships of Junortoun, Goornong and Strathfieldsaye, succeeding the
major changes to Bendigo’s bus network in January.

PTV is currently undertaking consultation for bus network upgrades in
Ballarat, Warragul/Drouin and the La Trobe Valley. This follows the
release of the Victorian Government’s Regional Network Development Plan
at the end of May along with increased funding in the recent stage
budget. The Ballarat network changes propose to increase frequency and
directness, improve train connectivity (with all routes serving Ballarat
station) and consolidate the number of routes from 19 to 15. Coverage
will be expanded in Brown Hill while a new full time route will directly
connect Sebastopol students to Federation University.

A considerable expansion of coverage is planned for Warragul and Drouin,
along with extended operating hours to include the commuter peaks –
currently services are limited to interpeak shopper trips. The changes
are a resurrection of a 2009 proposal that was not implemented.

In the LaTrobe Valley, a new kink on route 45 in Traralgon will serve
the expanding homemaker district on Princes Hwy as well as McMahon St.
The Moe - Traralgon intertown service (Route 1) will become faster by
dropping the deviation through Newborough, set to be replaced by a local
15 service. Two options have been proposed to bring buses to the area
west of Moe Racecourse.

A new regional numbering system across Victoria has also been
foreshadowed to remove duplication on online apps and websites – each
route would get a letter prefix based on the town’s name – e.g. B25 in
Ballarat. This would explain the high numbers now used in Bendigo,
avoiding potential clashes with routes in Ballarat, Bairnsdale and
Benalla.

**Ballarat**: Public Transport Victoria has released details of a new
network as detailed below. Ballarat routes will have a “B” prefix as
part of what will become a state wide route-numbering network.

-   B10 City-Sturt St West (previously 15 Sturt St West, 16 Lake
    Gardens). Now via Howitt St Wendouree instead of Sturt St direct
-   B11 City-Wendouree West (previously 1)
-   B12 City-Wendouree (previously 2 City-Wendouree and 6 Webbcona
    Loop). Now via Creswick Road instead of Lydiard St North
-   B13 City-Invermay (previously 4). Now via Lydiard St North instead
    of Doveton St North
-   B14 City-Black Hill (previously 5). Now via Huntley St North instead
    of Peel St
-   B15 City-Brown Hill (previously 7). Now via Water St both ways
-   B20 City-Canadian (previously 8 Eureka, 9 Canadian)
-   B21 City-Buninyong (previously 10)
-   B22 City-University via Sebastopol (previously 12 Sebastopol)
-   B23 City-Mt Pleasant (previously 11)
-   B24 City-Sebastopol (previously 14 Delacombe via Sutton St, 19
    Delacombe-Sebastopol West)
-   B25 City-Delacombe via Pleasant St (previously 13)
-   B26 City-Alfredton (previously 18)
-   B30 City-Creswick (previously 3)
-   B31 Wendouree-Miners Rest (previously 17).

### **Western Australia**

**TransPerth:** Service Changes Effective 7 August 2016

-   37 Kings Park- Perth Airport Terminals 3 and 4 via Belmont is now a
    high frequency service numbered 935.
-   40 Perth-Perth Airport Terminals 3 and 4 via Great Eastern Highway
    has time changes and additional weekend trips.
-   551 Rockingham-Shoalwater via Parkin St has time changes and fewer
    trips deviating to Arcadia Drive.
-   825 Fremantle-Rockingham via Cockburn and Patterson Roads has been
    renumbered 548 with some trips discontinued.
-   920 Fremantle-Rockingham via Rockingham Rd and Kwinana Town Centre
    has been renumbered 549 with some trips discontinued. Now runs all
    stops between Fremantle Station and the corner of Rockingham Road
    and Mayor Road, Munster. South of Mayor Road continues to be a
    limited stops service.
-   Routes 36, 282, 283, 285, 286, 287, 288, 293, 295, 296, 298, 299,
    584, 587, 588, 589, 591, 592, 593, 594, 597 and 598 have time
    changes.

14 Mt Hawthorn Shuttle was withdrawn on Sunday 14 August. Route 14 had
operated for 12 months covering an area not covered by an amended 15
Perth-Glendalough.

It is proposed to extend 450 Warwick-Landsdale further into Landsdale to
serve the Corimbia Estate.

It is proposed to extend 467 Whitfords-Joondalup further into Pearsall.

**Stadium Station shutdown**

After a series of night and weekend closures during the first half of
the year to facilitate construction of the new station at Perth Stadium,
a nine day closure of the Armadale/Thornlie line was undertaken from
Friday 1 to Saturday 9 July. Rail replacement routes were:

-   917 – all stops between Armadale - Cannington then express to
    Claisebrook (weekdays)
-   918 – all stops between Claisebrook - Cannington (weekdays)
-   908 – Cannington to Thornlie (weekends and weekdays)
-   907 – all stations Claisebrook to Armadale (evenings & weekends)

Transperth operators Path Transit, Swan Transit and Transdev were
assisted by several charter operators on weekdays prior to 1900. These
included ATG (Buswest), Horizons West, Kalamunda Bus Service,
Metropolitan Omnibus Company, Ryan & Ryan and Westwide.

**Bunbury** The WA Public Transport Authority has released details of a
proposed new network as follows:

-   825 Bunbury-Dolphin Discovery Centre (new service replacing 827
    along Koombana Drive)
-   826 Bunbury-Bunbury Passenger Terminal Direct (new service)
-   827 Bunbury-Glen Iris via Bunbury East and Bunbury Passenger
    Terminal (replaces 845 in East Bunbury and no longer serves Eaton)
-   828 Bunbury-Health Campus via Carey Park East (unchanged)
-   829 Bunbury-Health Campus via Carey Park West (unchanged)
-   830 Bunbury-College Grove via Ocean Drive (replaces discontinued 831
    along Ocean Drive and extended to College Grove from Health Campus)
-   832 Bunbury-Health Campus via South Bunbury and Withers (replaces
    830 in South Bunbury)
-   841 Bunbury Kingston (unchanged)
-   843 Bunbury-Dalyellup (unchanged).
-   844 Bunbury-Eaton (extended to Ryeland St)
-   845 Bunbury-Millbridge (to omit East Bunbury and operate along Eaton
    Drive instead of Hamilton Road Eaton)

Note: 831 Bunbury-Dalyellup via Ocean Drive and Withers discontinued,
Ocean Drive served by altered 830, Withers served by existing 832 and
Dalyellup by existing 843.

**Thanks** to Tony Bailey, Ian Cooper, Hilaire Fraser, Craig Halsall,
Victor Isaacs and Sydney Morning Herald and *Transit Australia* for Bus
news.

## **FERRY NEWS**

**Port Phillip Ferry Flounders**

Paul Little’s privately funded ferry trial between Wyndham Harbour and
Docklands has reportedly cost him over a million dollars since being
launched in May, with loadings often struggling to hit double figures on
the 400-seat vessel. An attempt to attract passengers saw the \$20 trial
return fare slashed to match a \$7.80 myki fare. A speed restriction
along the Yarra is partly to blame, along with a lack of a stop at Point
Cook. Attempts to attract leisure travellers have fared better, with
higher weekend loadings events to encourage families to travel to
Werribee Open Range Zoo and Friday Winter Fireworks in Docklands. Three
trials of daytime services to Portarlington on the Bellarine Peninsula
have been much more successful, with reports of sell-out trips. It was
decided to abandon ship on the Wyndham Harbour commuter trial on August
10 to divert resources to a commuter trial from Portarlington effective
the following morning. Voyages are currently timed at 90 minutes, with a
\$25 return fare. If speed restrictions are removed on the Yarra, the
route will be around 30 minutes faster than commuting by road via
Geelong. Trips were unfortunately cancelled at short notice on Saturday
13 August & Tuesday 16 August with harbour works at Portarlington
blamed. Weekday commuter services depart Portarlington at 0700,
returning at 1730. On Mondays and Thursdays, an 1130 departure allows
for Melbourne lunch and shopping excursions. On Tuesday and Wednesday,
Melburnians can enjoy 3 and half hours down in Portarlington, departing
Docklands at 0930. On weekends two return sailings operate, leaving
Portarlington at 0900 and 1600 and Docklands at 1110 and 1745. Limited
services continue to serve Wydnham Harbour on Fridays, catering for
daytrips from Melbourne to Werribee Open Range Zoo and Mansion (via the
connecting 439 bus) or lunch outings into Melbourne. The service after
the Docklands Evening Fireworks has been suspended. On weekends, the
0900 and 1745 services call at Wyndham Harbour, extending the
Portarlington travel time by around 20 minutes. Little has foreshadowed
a service from south-east suburbs such as Frankston, Brighton and St
Kilda may be trailed in the future.

From Monday 29 August, the **Southern Moreton Bay Island** ferry
timetable was altered to improve connections with buses on both weekdays
and weekends. A copy is at
<https://translink.com.au/service-updates/89471>

**Botany Bay:** A Transport for NSW draft study proposes \$17 million be
spent rebuilding wharves on the both sides of the Bay to provide a
service for tourists and commuters between La Perouse and Kurnell. The
study says there could be stops at Brighton-Le-Sands and — to service
workers at Sydney Airport — one either at the mouth of the Cooks River
or at an existing recreational facility at Hayes Dock in Port Botany,
which could then be linked by a shuttle bus to the airport.

The draft report estimates commuter use in peak hour at 135 trips, with
the journey between Kurnell and La Perouse, 1.5km, taking 15 to 20
minutes. By comparison, travelling the 32km between the two points via
bus and train currently takes two hours and 20 minutes, or between 32
and 46 minutes in the car without traffic. However, the study shows a
ferry service would be primarily for tourists, as it would not generate
the revenue needed to operate as a stand-alone commuter shuttle and
would need a cash injection from the NSW government. Nevertheless, it is
expected to “provide numerous indirect social, economic and tourism
benefits for La Perouse, Kurnell and wider Sydney” that would bolster
any economic shortfall. Transport for NSW is seeking feedback on the
draft feasibility study.

There were ferries on Botany Bay from the 1890s until the wharves were
destroyed by a storm in 1974.

**Thanks** to the *Daily Telegraph* for Ferry news.

## **AIR NEWS**

### **Domestic**

**Tigerair** will recommence flights between Melbourne and Canberra from
9 December. This will be a return to a route it flew between 2008 and
2011. It ceased when Tigerair had a very poor reputation for reliability
and safety. Since then, it has undergone change in ownership and it
promises a completely changed approach. The move will re-establish a
low-cost service to Canberra. On Mon, Tues, Wed, Sat dep Melb 1030,
Canberra arr 1135, dep 1205, Melb arr 1315. On Thurs, Fri, Sat Melb dep
1735, Canberra arr 1840, dep 1920, Melb arr 2020.

Figures by the Bureau of Infrastructure, Transport and Regional
Economics of **passenger numbers at major Australian airports** in
2014-2015 are:

|   |   |
|:-:|--:|
|Sydney | 39.02 m
|Melbourne | 31.94 m
|Brisbane | 21.92 m
|Perth | 12.72 m
|Adelaide | 7.67.m
|Gold Coast | 5.87 m
|Cairns | 4.39 m
|Canberra | 2.80 m
|Hobart | 2.18 m
|Darwin | 2.06 m

**Thanks** to the *Canberra Times* and the BITRE for Air news.

## **About *Table Talk***

***Table Talk*** is published monthly by the Australian Timetable
Association Inc. (Registration No. A0043673H) to record timetable news.
The ATA also publishes the ***Times*** covering timetable history and
analysis. Contributions are invited and are very welcome. Please send
these to the appropriate Editor. ABN&nbsp;74248483468.

The **deadline** **for *Table Talk*** is the second last weekend of the
month, but contributions are welcome at all times.

**Editor, Rail and Tram, Air, Ferry:** Victor Isaacs,
***<thetimes@austta.org.au>,*** 11 Blacket St Downer ACT 2602.

**Editor,** **Bus**: As an interim arrangement, please send your Bus
news to ***<thetimes@austta.org.au>***

**Production and Mailout**: Geoff and Judy Lambert.

**Proofreaders:** Agnes Boskovitz, David Cranney and Geoff Hassall.

Original material appearing in ***Table Talk*** may be reproduced in
other publications but acknowledgement is required.

**Membership of the Australian Timetable Association** includes monthly
copies of the *Times*, *Table Talk*, the Distribution List of
timetables, and the monthly Auction catalogues. The membership fee is
\$60 (Adult) and \$36 (Junior) pa. Membership enquiries should be
directed to the Membership Officer, Len Regan, at
***ata.treasurer@austta.org.au***

Back issues of ***Table Talk*** are available on the Australian
Timetable Association’s website, ***austta.org.au,*** after two months.

**Table Talk Newswire** is an advance monthly email of Rail news. To
obtain this, ask the Rail Editor at
***<thetimes@austta.org.au>***
